
COMPUTER

1.  A computer is an electronic device that performs calculations and operations based on instructions provided by a __________.
    a) Software or hardware program
    b) Human operator
    c) Mechanical system
    d) Electrical circuit
    Answer: a) Software or hardware program

2.  Which of the following is a characteristic of computers, indicating their ability to process millions of calculations per second?
    a) Accuracy
    b) Diligence
    c) Speed
    d) Versatility
    Answer: c) Speed

3.  Computers are highly accurate because they work on:
    a) Human instructions
    b) Inbuilt software programs
    c) Mechanical parts
    d) Electrical impulses
    Answer: b) Inbuilt software programs

4.  The characteristic of computers that refers to their ability to perform complex and long calculations with the same speed and accuracy is:
    a) Versatility
    b) Storage
    c) Diligence
    d) Speed
    Answer: c) Diligence

5.  What characteristic allows computers to perform various operations at the same time?
    a) Speed
    b) Accuracy
    c) Versatility
    d) Storage
    Answer: c) Versatility

6.  The ability of computers to store a large amount of data or instructions in its memory is known as:
    a) Speed
    b) Accuracy
    c) Diligence
    d) Storage
    Answer: d) Storage

7.  Which was the first counting device developed in China?
    a) Napier’s Bones
    b) Abacus
    c) Pascaline
    d) Punched Card System
    Answer: b) Abacus

8.  The Abacus consists of a rectangular wooden frame and:
    a) Gears
    b) Levers
    c) Beads
    d) Wires
    Answer: c) Beads

9.  Who developed Napier’s Bones?
    a) Blaise Pascal
    b) John Napier
    c) Herman Hollerith
    d) Charles Babbage
    Answer: b) John Napier

10. Napier’s Bones was developed to perform which operations?
    a) Simple addition and subtraction
    b) Multiplication and division
    c) Square roots
    d) Logarithms only
    Answer: b) Multiplication and division

11. What was the first calculating device with the capability to perform additions and subtractions on whole numbers?
    a) Abacus
    b) Napier’s Bones
    c) Pascaline
    d) Analytical Engine
    Answer: c) Pascaline

12. Who developed Pascaline?
    a) John Napier
    b) Blaise Pascal
    c) Herman Hollerith
    d) Charles Babbage
    Answer: b) Blaise Pascal

13. The Pascaline device was made up of interlocked cog wheels having numbers from:
    a) 1 to 10
    b) 0 to 9
    c) 0 to 100
    d) 1 to 100
    Answer: b) 0 to 9

14. Who invented the Punched Card System?
    a) Charles Babbage
    b) Blaise Pascal
    c) Herman Hollerith
    d) Howard Hathaway Aiken
    Answer: c) Herman Hollerith

15. The Punched Card System was used for:
    a) Performing complex calculations
    b) Storing and retrieving data
    c) Printing documents
    d) Generating random numbers
    Answer: b) Storing and retrieving data

16. Charles Babbage invented the Difference Engine to:
    a) Store large amounts of data
    b) Solve algebraic expressions and mathematical tasks accurately
    c) Create graphical interfaces
    d) Connect to networks
    Answer: b) Solve algebraic expressions and mathematical tasks accurately

17. The modified machine designed by Charles Babbage after the Difference Engine was called the:
    a) Analytical Engine
    b) Tabular Machine
    c) Mark I
    d) ABC
    Answer: a) Analytical Engine

18. The design principle of the Analytical Engine can be divided into:
    a) CPU, RAM, ROM
    b) Input, Output, Memory, Central Processing Unit
    c) ALU, Control Unit, Registers
    d) Hard drive, Keyboard, Monitor
    Answer: b) Input, Output, Memory, Central Processing Unit

19. Why is Charles Babbage known as the Father of Computer?
    a) He invented the first electronic computer.
    b) His Analytical Engine's design principles are similar to today's computers.
    c) He developed the first commercially available computer.
    d) He created the first operating system.
    Answer: b) His Analytical Engine's design principles are similar to today's computers.

20. The Hollerith machine was incorporated with:
    a) Vacuum tubes and transistors
    b) Tabular and punched cards
    c) Magnetic drums and core memory
    d) Integrated circuits and microprocessors
    Answer: b) Tabular and punched cards

21. Who invented the Hollerith machine?
    a) Charles Babbage
    b) Howard Hathaway Aiken
    c) Herman Hollerith
    d) John Vincent Atanasoff
    Answer: c) Herman Hollerith

22. The first electro-mechanical computing device, Mark I Computer, was developed by:
    a) Charles Babbage
    b) Herman Hollerith
    c) Howard Hathaway Aiken
    d) J. Presper Eckert
    Answer: c) Howard Hathaway Aiken

23. Which company did Howard Hathaway Aiken collaborate with to develop Mark I computer?
    a) Intel
    b) Microsoft
    c) IBM
    d) Apple
    Answer: c) IBM

24. The Atanasoff-Berry Computer (ABC) was the first:
    a) Electro-mechanical computing device
    b) Commercial computer
    c) Un-programmable Electronic Digital Computer
    d) General-purpose electronic computer
    Answer: c) Un-programmable Electronic Digital Computer

25. Who designed the Atanasoff-Berry Computer (ABC)?
    a) J. Presper Eckert and John Mauchly
    b) John Vincent Atanasoff and Clifford E. Berry
    c) Howard Hathaway Aiken and Herman Hollerith
    d) Charles Babbage and Ada Lovelace
    Answer: b) John Vincent Atanasoff and Clifford E. Berry

26. The ABC was the first computer to use what for storage?
    a) Vacuum tubes
    b) Magnetic drums
    c) Capacitors
    d) Punched cards
    Answer: c) Capacitors

27. What was ENIAC primarily used for?
    a) Storing vast amounts of data
    b) General purposes, such as solving numerical problems
    c) Controlling industrial machinery
    d) Playing video games
    Answer: b) General purposes, such as solving numerical problems

28. Who invented ENIAC?
    a) John Vincent Atanasoff and Clifford E. Berry
    b) J. Presper Eckert and John Mauchly
    c) Howard Hathaway Aiken
    d) Herman Hollerith
    Answer: b) J. Presper Eckert and John Mauchly

29. EDVAC was the successor of ENIAC. In EDVAC, what was used for arithmetic operations and internal storage of instructions?
    a) Decimal numbers
    b) Roman numerals
    c) Binary numbers
    d) Octal numbers
    Answer: c) Binary numbers

30. Which computer was the first practical general-purpose stored-program electronic computer?
    a) ENIAC
    b) EDVAC
    c) EDSAC
    d) UNIVAC
    Answer: c) EDSAC

31. EDSAC was built according to the principles of which architect?
    a) Charles Babbage
    b) John von Neumann
    c) Alan Turing
    d) Blaise Pascal
    Answer: b) von Neumann

32. What was the first commercially available computer?
    a) EDVAC
    b) EDSAC
    c) UNIVAC
    d) ENIAC
    Answer: c) UNIVAC

33. Which company made UNIVAC?
    a) IBM
    b) Intel Corporation
    c) Eckert-Mauchly Computer Company
    d) Microsoft
    Answer: c) Eckert-Mauchly Computer Company

34. When did Intel Corporation design the first general-purpose programmable processor, INTEL 4004?
    a) 1959
    b) 1965
    c) 1969
    d) 1980
    Answer: c) 1969

35. The INTEL 4004 was a set of four chips known as the:
    a) MCS-4
    b) PDP-8
    c) IBM-701
    d) CDC-1604
    Answer: a) MCS-4

36. Who is known as the Father of Modern Computer Science?
    a) Charles Babbage
    b) Alan Turing
    c) John von Neumann
    d) J. Presper Eckert
    Answer: b) Alan Turing

37. Which computer is referred to as the First Non-programmable Electronic Digital Computer?
    a) ENIAC
    b) UNIVAC
    c) Atanasoff Berry Computer (ABC)
    d) EDSAC
    Answer: c) Atanasoff Berry Computer (ABC)

38. What is the name of the First General Purpose Electronic Digital Computer?
    a) EDSAC
    b) EDVAC
    c) Electronic Numerical Integrator and Calculator (ENIAC)
    d) UNIVAC
    Answer: c) Electronic Numerical Integrator and Calculator (ENIAC)

39. The First Micro Processor was:
    a) IBM-701
    b) INTEL 4004
    c) CDC-1604
    d) Apple I
    Answer: b) INTEL 4004

40. What were the primary electronic components used in First Generation Computers?
    a) Transistors
    b) Integrated Circuits
    c) Vacuum Tubes
    d) Microprocessors
    Answer: c) Vacuum Tubes

41. First Generation Computers performed computations in:
    a) Nanoseconds
    b) Milliseconds
    c) Microseconds
    d) Picoseconds
    Answer: b) Milliseconds

42. Which language was primarily used in First Generation Computers?
    a) Assembly language
    b) High-level language
    c) Machine language
    d) Fourth generation language
    Answer: c) Machine language

43. Which of the following is an example of a First Generation Computer?
    a) IBM-1620
    b) IBM-360 series
    c) UNIVAC
    d) Apple II
    Answer: c) UNIVAC

44. What electronic components replaced Vacuum Tubes in Second Generation Computers?
    a) Integrated Circuits
    b) Transistors
    c) Microprocessors
    d) ULSI chips
    Answer: b) Transistors

45. Which type of language was used in Second Generation Computers?
    a) Machine language
    b) Assembly languages
    c) FORTRAN
    d) Natural language
    Answer: b) Assembly languages

46. What was used as storage in Second Generation Computers?
    a) Punched cards
    b) Capacitors
    c) Magnetic cores and magnetic tapes
    d) Semi-conductor devices
    Answer: c) Magnetic cores and magnetic tapes

47. An example of a Second Generation Computer is:
    a) EDSAC
    b) IBM-1620
    c) Honeywell-6000 series
    d) Apple I
    Answer: b) IBM-1620

48. What electronic components were used in Third Generation Computers?
    a) Vacuum Tubes
    b) Transistors
    c) Integrated Circuits (ICs)
    d) VLSI circuits
    Answer: c) Integrated Circuits (ICs)

49. Third Generation Computers performed computation in:
    a) Milliseconds
    b) Microseconds
    c) Nanoseconds
    d) Picoseconds
    Answer: c) Nanoseconds

50. Which of the following is a high-level language used in Third Generation Computers?
    a) Machine language
    b) Assembly language
    c) COBOL
    d) 4GL
    Answer: c) COBOL

51. Operating systems like remote processing, time-sharing, and multi-programming were introduced in which generation of computers?
    a) First Generation
    b) Second Generation
    c) Third Generation
    d) Fourth Generation
    Answer: c) Third Generation

52. An example of a Third Generation Computer is:
    a) IBM-701
    b) CDC-1604
    c) IBM-360 series
    d) STAR 1000
    Answer: c) IBM-360 series

53. What kind of circuits are used in Fourth Generation Computers?
    a) Integrated Circuits (ICs)
    b) Transistors
    c) Very Large Scale Integrated (VLSI) circuits
    d) Ultra Large Scale Integrated (ULSI) chips
    Answer: c) Very Large Scale Integrated (VLSI) circuits

54. What are used as primary memory in Fourth Generation Computers?
    a) Magnetic cores
    b) Vacuum tubes
    c) Semi-conductor devices
    d) Biochips
    Answer: c) Semi-conductor devices

55. Which type of languages are used in Fourth Generation Computers?
    a) Assembly languages
    b) High-level languages like FORTRAN
    c) Problem-oriented fourth generation languages (4GL)
    d) Natural language
    Answer: c) Problem-oriented fourth generation languages (4GL)

56. Which of the following is an example of a Fourth Generation Computer?
    a) UNIVAC
    b) IBM-360 series
    c) Apple series – I & II
    d) Supercomputers
    Answer: c) Apple series – I & II

57. What kind of chips are used in Fifth Generation Computers?
    a) VLSI circuits
    b) Integrated Circuits
    c) Ultra Large Scale Integrated (ULSI) chips
    d) Transistors
    Answer: c) Ultra Large Scale Integrated (ULSI) chips

58. Fifth Generation Computers are in the developmental stage and are based on:
    a) Machine language programming
    b) Electromechanical principles
    c) Artificial intelligence
    d) Magnetic core memory
    Answer: c) Artificial intelligence

59. What kind of input can Fifth Generation Computers respond to?
    a) Punched card input
    b) Binary code
    c) Natural language input
    d) Assembly language
    Answer: c) Natural language input

60. What will be used as memory devices in Fifth Generation Computers?
    a) Magnetic disks
    b) Semi-conductor devices
    c) Biochips
    d) Magnetic tapes
    Answer: c) Biochips

61. KIPS (Knowledge-based Information Processing System) architecture will be used in which generation of computers?
    a) Third Generation
    b) Fourth Generation
    c) Fifth Generation
    d) Second Generation
    Answer: c) Fifth Generation

62. Which of the following is an example of a Fifth Generation Computer?
    a) IBM 4341
    b) PDP 11
    c) Robots
    d) IBM-1620
    Answer: c) Robots


TYPES OF COMPUTER

1.  Which type of computer stores data continuously in the form of physical quantities and produces output as a graph?
    a) Digital Computer
    b) Hybrid Computer
    c) Analog Computer
    d) Supercomputer
    Answer: c) Analog Computer

2.  Analog computers are used in the calculation of physical variables such as:
    a) Binary numbers
    b) Discrete values
    c) Voltage, pressure, temperature, speed
    d) Logical operations
    Answer: c) Voltage, pressure, temperature, speed

3.  Which type of computer works with data represented in binary 0s and 1s?
    a) Analog Computer
    b) Digital Computer
    c) Hybrid Computer
    d) Mainframe Computer
    Answer: b) Digital Computer

4.  Digital computers are extensively used for solving complex problems in the field of:
    a) Weather forecasting only
    b) Engineering & technology, design, research and data processing
    c) Controlling physical variables
    d) Simple calculations
    Answer: b) Engineering & technology, design, research and data processing

5.  A computer that combines features of Analog and Digital computers is called a:
    a) Micro Computer
    b) Mini Computer
    c) Hybrid Computer
    d) Supercomputer
    Answer: c) Hybrid Computer

6.  In large industries and businesses, a hybrid computer can be used for:
    a) Only logical operations
    b) Only efficient processing of differential equations
    c) Logical operations as well as efficient processing of differential equations
    d) Playing games and surfing the Internet
    Answer: c) Logical operations as well as efficient processing of differential equations

7.  Which type of computer is small, inexpensive, and commonly used at homes for playing games and surfing the Internet?
    a) Mini Computer
    b) Mainframe Computer
    c) Micro Computer
    d) Supercomputer
    Answer: c) Micro Computer

8.  Computers that possess most of the features and capabilities of a large computer but are smaller in physical size are known as:
    a) Micro Computer
    b) Mini Computer
    c) Mainframe Computer
    d) Supercomputer
    Answer: b) Mini Computer

9.  Minicomputers are typically used for:
    a) Personal use at home
    b) Small or mid-range operating business and scientific applications
    c) Large-scale applications supporting hundreds of users
    d) Weather forecasting and fluid dynamics
    Answer: b) Small or mid-range operating business and scientific applications

10. Which type of computer is expensive, large, and capable of supporting hundreds of users simultaneously?
    a) Micro Computer
    b) Mini Computer
    c) Mainframe Computer
    d) Supercomputer
    Answer: c) Mainframe Computer

11. Mainframe computers are used for:
    a) Personal entertainment
    b) Solving specific problems with pre-programmed instructions
    c) Specific large-scale applications
    d) Mobile computing
    Answer: c) Specific large-scale applications

12. Which type of computer is powerful, expensive, and the fastest, capable of performing billions and trillions of calculations per second?
    a) Mainframe Computer
    b) Hybrid Computer
    c) Supercomputer
    d) Workstation
    Answer: c) Supercomputer

13. Supercomputers use architectural and operational principles from:
    a) Sequential processing
    b) Parallel and grid processing
    c) Analog computing
    d) Single-user operations
    Answer: b) Parallel and grid processing

14. Supercomputers are used for applications that require large amounts of mathematical computations, such as:
    a) Basic word processing
    b) Email communication
    c) Weather forecasting, fluid dynamics, graphic design
    d) Data entry
    Answer: c) Weather forecasting, fluid dynamics, graphic design

15. India launched which supercomputer recently to improve its weather forecasting?
    a) PARAM 8000
    b) Pratyush
    c) Mihir
    d) SAGA-220
    Answer: c) Mihir

16. What was the First Super Computer in the world?
    a) Summit
    b) PARAM 8000
    c) Cray CDC 6600
    d) Pratyush
    Answer: c) Cray CDC 6600

17. Which supercomputer is recognized as the Fastest Super Computer in the world?
    a) Pratyush
    b) Summit by the USA
    c) PARAM 8000
    d) Cray CDC 6600
    Answer: b) Summit by the USA

18. What was the First Super Computer of India?
    a) Pratyush
    b) Mihir
    c) PARAM 8000
    d) SAGA-220
    Answer: c) PARAM 8000

19. Which is the Fastest Super Computer in India?
    a) PARAM 8000
    b) Mihir
    c) Pratyush
    d) Cray CDC 6600
    Answer: c) Pratyush

20. A computer that can perform an extensive variety of operations and store/execute different programs is a:
    a) Special Purpose Computer
    b) Analog Computer
    c) General Purpose Computer
    d) Hybrid Computer
    Answer: c) General Purpose Computer

21. Which of the following is an example of a general-purpose computer?
    a) Aircraft control system
    b) Electronic voting machines
    c) Smartphones and tablets
    d) Dedicated calculation devices
    Answer: c) Smartphones and tablets

22. Computers designed to solve specific problems with pre-programmed instructions are called:
    a) General Purpose Computer
    b) Digital Computer
    c) Special Purpose Computer
    d) Micro Computer
    Answer: c) Special Purpose Computer

23. An Aircraft control system and Electronic voting machines are examples of:
    a) General Purpose Computers
    b) Hybrid Computers
    c) Special Purpose Computers
    d) Workstations
    Answer: c) Special Purpose Computers

24. Which type of computer is small enough to fit in the palm of a hand and uses an electronic pen for input?
    a) Laptop Computer
    b) Personal Computer (PC)
    c) Palmtop Computer
    d) Workstation
    Answer: c) Palmtop Computer

25. What is a portable computer with less weight, designed for low power consumption, and has an attached keyboard and touchpad?
    a) Palmtop Computer
    b) Personal Computer (PC)
    c) Laptop Computer
    d) Workstation
    Answer: c) Laptop Computer

26. A cost-effective computer designed for a single end-user and dependent on microprocessor technology is a:
    a) Workstation
    b) Laptop Computer
    c) Personal Computer (PC)
    d) Server
    Answer: c) Personal Computer (PC)

27. Which type of computer is faster than a Personal Computer, designed for better multitasking, and has additional RAM and higher-speed graphics adapters?
    a) Laptop Computer
    b) Client
    c) Workstation
    d) Palmtop Computer
    Answer: c) Workstation

28. In a client-server model, which device manages the sharing of network resources to the users?
    a) Client
    b) Workstation
    c) Server
    d) Personal Computer
    Answer: c) Server

29. Which of the following is NOT a basic component of a computer system?
    a) Hardware
    b) Software
    c) Data
    d) Internet
    Answer: d) Internet

30. The physical and tangible components of the computer (keyboard, mouse, monitor etc.) are referred to as:
    a) Software
    b) Data
    c) Hardware
    d) Users
    Answer: c) Hardware

31. A set of electronic instructions called programs that make the computer perform tasks is known as:
    a) Hardware
    b) Data
    c) Software
    d) Users
    Answer: c) Software

32. The set of facts, which the computer stores and reads in the form of numbers, is called:
    a) Software
    b) Data
    c) Programs
    d) Instructions
    Answer: b) Data

33. The people who make use of a computer to obtain certain results/outcomes are called:
    a) Developers
    b) Programmers
    c) Users
    d) Technicians
    Answer: c) Users

34. Which component is the main printed circuit board of a computer that carries the CPU, ROM, RAM, and BIOS chip?
    a) Hard Drive
    b) Mother Board
    c) Graphics Card
    d) Power Supply
    Answer: b) Mother Board

35. The process of starting a computer from a powerless state and setting it up to normal working condition is known as:
    a) Warm Boot
    b) Soft Start
    c) Reset
    d) Cold Boot
    Answer: d) Cold Boot

36. Cold boot is also known as:
    a) Cold Start
    b) Hard Start
    c) Hard Boot
    d) All of the above
    Answer: d) All of the above

37. Which component looks for system files during a boot process?
    a) CPU
    b) Monitor
    c) Keyboard
    d) BIOS
    Answer: d) BIOS

38. Specialised program(s) designed to allow input or output device(s) to communicate with the rest of the computer system is called:
    a) Utility Software
    b) Operating system
    c) Device Driver
    d) Language Translator
    Answer: c) Device Driver

39. Which type of computer is also known informally as "Number cruncher"?
    a) Minicomputer
    b) Supercomputer
    c) Micro computer
    d) Mainframe computer
    Answer: b) Supercomputer

40. Which organization developed a SAGA-220 supercomputer in 2011?
    a) NASA
    b) DRDO
    c) ISRO
    d) JAXA
    Answer: c) ISRO

41. What is the name of the program a personal computer’s microprocessor uses to get the computer system started after you turn it on?
    a) Vertical Programme
    b) BIOS Programme
    c) Horizontal Programme
    d) Application software
    Answer: b) BIOS Programme

42. The input unit is used for:
    a) Displaying output
    b) Storing data permanently
    c) Giving instructions and data by using input devices
    d) Performing arithmetic operations
    Answer: c) Giving instructions and data by using input devices

43. Which unit converts instructions and data to a computer-acceptable format and supplies them for further processing?
    a) Output Unit
    b) Central Processing Unit
    c) Memory Unit
    d) Input Unit
    Answer: d) Input Unit

44. Which part of the computer performs most of the processing inside a computer?
    a) Input Unit
    b) Output Unit
    c) Central Processing Unit (CPU)
    d) Memory Unit
    Answer: c) Central Processing Unit (CPU)

45. A CPU has been constructed on a single integrated circuit called a:
    a) Motherboard
    b) Microprocessor
    c) Hard drive
    d) RAM
    Answer: b) Microprocessor

46. The CPU consists of which three main components?
    a) Input Unit, Output Unit, Memory Unit
    b) Control Unit, Arithmetic Logic Unit (ALU), Memory Unit
    c) RAM, ROM, Hard Drive
    d) Keyboard, Mouse, Monitor
    Answer: b) Control Unit, Arithmetic Logic Unit (ALU), Memory Unit

47. Which unit manages the computer's various components and interprets program instructions?
    a) Arithmetic Logic Unit
    b) Memory Unit
    c) Control Unit
    d) Input Unit
    Answer: c) Control Unit

48. The ALU can perform:
    a) Only arithmetic operations
    b) Only logical operations
    c) Arithmetic and logical operations
    d) Input/Output operations
    Answer: c) Arithmetic and logical operations

49. Boolean logic operations like AND, OR, XOR, and NOT are performed by the:
    a) Control Unit
    b) Memory Unit
    c) Arithmetic Logic Unit (ALU)
    d) Output Unit
    Answer: c) Arithmetic Logic Unit (ALU)

50. Computer main memory consists of:
    a) Primary and secondary memory
    b) Cache and virtual memory
    c) Registers and BIOS
    d) Hard drive and floppy disk
    Answer: a) Primary and secondary memory

51. Primary memory holds data and instructions on which the computer is currently working. What is its characteristic regarding data retention when power is switched off?
    a) Data is permanently stored
    b) Data is lost
    c) Data is transferred to secondary memory
    d) Data is encrypted
    Answer: b) Data is lost

52. Primary memory is generally made up of:
    a) Magnetic disks
    b) Optical discs
    c) Semiconductor devices
    d) Magnetic tapes
    Answer: c) Semiconductor devices

53. Primary memory is often referred to as:
    a) Non-volatile memory
    b) Volatile memory
    c) Persistent memory
    d) Secondary storage
    Answer: b) Volatile memory

54. The two types of primary memory are:
    a) Hard Drive & Floppy Disk
    b) CD-ROM & DVD
    c) Random Access Memory (RAM) & Read Only Memory (ROM)
    d) Cache & Virtual Memory
    Answer: c) Random Access Memory (RAM) & Read Only Memory (ROM)

55. Which type of memory is the internal memory of the CPU for storing data, programs, and results, and is read/write memory that stores data only while the machine is working?
    a) ROM
    b) Hard Drive
    c) RAM
    d) CD-ROM
    Answer: c) RAM

56. Which type of RAM must be constantly refreshed, or it loses its contents, and is more economical?
    a) Static Random-Access Memory (SRAM)
    b) Synchronous Dynamic Random-Access Memory (SDRAM)
    c) Dynamic Random-Access Memory (DRAM)
    d) Read Only Memory (ROM)
    Answer: c) Dynamic Random-Access Memory (DRAM)

57. Which type of RAM is faster and less volatile than DRAM but requires more power and is more expensive, and does not need to be refreshed?
    a) Dynamic Random-Access Memory (DRAM)
    b) Static Random-Access Memory (SRAM)
    c) Synchronous Dynamic Random-Access Memory (SDRAM)
    d) Read Only Memory (ROM)
    Answer: b) Static Random-Access Memory (SRAM)

58. A type of DRAM that can run at much higher clock speeds is:
    a) SRAM
    b) SDRAM
    c) MROM
    d) EEPROM
    Answer: b) SDRAM

59. Which type of memory stores data permanently on PCs and other electronic devices, performs major input/output tasks, and is non-volatile?
    a) RAM
    b) Hard Drive
    c) ROM
    d) Flash Drive
    Answer: c) ROM

60. The very first ROMs that were hard-wired devices containing a pre-programmed set of data or instructions are known as:
    a) PROM
    b) EPROM
    c) EEPROM
    d) Masked ROM (MROM)
    Answer: d) Masked ROM (MROM)

61. Which type of ROM can be modified only once by a user using a PROM program?
    a) MROM
    b) EPROM
    c) PROM
    d) EEPROM
    Answer: c) PROM

62. The EPROM can be erased by exposing it to:
    a) Infrared light
    b) Ultraviolet light
    c) X-rays
    d) Electrical signals
    Answer: b) Ultraviolet light

63. Which type of ROM has a Quartz window in the package to expose the chip to UV light and was widely used as BIOS chips?
    a) PROM
    b) EEPROM
    c) EPROM
    d) MROM
    Answer: c) EPROM

64. Which type of ROM is programmed and erased electrically, and can be erased and reprogrammed about ten thousand times?
    a) MROM
    b) PROM
    c) EPROM
    d) EEPROM
    Answer: d) EEPROM

65. Secondary memory stores data on a:
    a) Short-term basis
    b) Permanent basis
    c) Volatile basis
    d) Temporary basis in RAM
    Answer: b) Permanent basis

66. Secondary memory must first be copied into primary storage because it:
    a) Is too slow
    b) Cannot be processed directly by the CPU
    c) Is too large
    d) Is only for backup
    Answer: b) Cannot be processed directly by the CPU

67. Which of the following is NOT a secondary memory device?
    a) Hard drives
    b) Floppy disks
    c) CDs
    d) RAM
    Answer: d) RAM

68. A non-removable storage device containing magnetic disks or platters rotating at high speeds is a:
    a) Floppy Disk
    b) Compact Disc
    c) Hard drive
    d) USB Flash drive
    Answer: c) Hard drive

69. What is composed of a thin, flexible magnetic disk sealed in a square plastic carrier, widely used to distribute software and transfer files in the past?
    a) Hard drive
    b) Compact Disc
    c) Floppy Disk
    d) DVD
    Answer: c) Floppy Disk

70. A portable storage medium that can be used to record and store data in digital form, but is fragile and prone to scratches, is a:
    a) Floppy Disk
    b) Digital Video Disc
    c) Compact Disc (CD)
    d) Blu-ray Disc
    Answer: c) Compact Disc (CD)

71. Which storage device can be read but cannot be changed or deleted?
    a) CD-R
    b) CD-RW
    c) Compact disc read-only memory (CD-ROM)
    d) Flash Drive
    Answer: c) Compact disc read-only memory (CD-ROM)

72. A device currently used to store data in large amounts and accepts high definition material, with a two-layered version holding approximately 17 gigabytes, is a:
    a) CD-ROM
    b) Blu-ray Disc
    c) Digital Video Disc (DVD)
    d) Holographic Versatile Disc
    Answer: c) Digital Video Disc (DVD)

73. The upgraded version of CD and DVD discs, commonly known as BD-ROM, with a maximum capacity of 25GB for a single layer, is:
    a) Holographic Versatile Disc
    b) Blu-ray Disc
    c) Zip Disk
    d) Flash Drive
    Answer: b) Blu-ray Disc

74. Which holographic storage format has a maximum capacity of 3.9 terabytes?
    a) Blu-ray Disc
    b) DVD
    c) Holographic Versatile Disc (HVD)
    d) Zip Disk
    Answer: c) Holographic Versatile Disc (HVD)

75. Small, ultra-portable storage devices that connect via a built-in USB plug, often referred to as pen drives or thumb drives, are called:
    a) Zip Disks
    b) Floppy Disks
    c) Flash Drives
    d) Hard Drives
    Answer: c) Flash Drives

76. What is an advanced version of the floppy disk, developed by Iomega, available in 100, 250-MB, and 750 MB capacities?
    a) Flash Drives
    b) Zip Disks
    c) Compact Discs
    d) DVDs
    Answer: b) Zip Disks

77. Which very high-speed semiconductor memory acts as a buffer between the CPU and main memory to speed up the CPU?
    a) Virtual Memory
    b) Secondary Memory
    c) Cache Memory
    d) ROM
    Answer: c) Cache Memory

78. Virtual memory permits software to use additional memory by utilizing the __________ as temporary storage.
    a) RAM
    b) ROM
    c) Hard disk drive (HDD)
    d) Cache memory
    Answer: c) Hard disk drive (HDD)

79. Which of the following is an example of Semiconductor Memory?
    a) CD-ROM
    b) Hard Disk Drive
    c) RAM
    d) Pen drive
    Answer: c) RAM

80. Which of the following falls under Optical Memory?
    a) Floppy Disk Drive
    b) Blu-ray Disc
    c) Hard Disk Drive
    d) Memory card
    Answer: b) Blu-ray Disc

81. Hard Disk Drive (HDD) and Floppy Disk Drive (FDD) are examples of:
    a) Semiconductor Memory
    b) Optical Memory
    c) Magnetic Memory
    d) Flash Memory
    Answer: c) Magnetic Memory

82. Pen drives and Memory cards are examples of:
    a) Magnetic Memory
    b) Optical Memory
    c) Semiconductor Memory
    d) Flash Memory
    Answer: d) Flash Memory




OUTPUT DEVICE

1.  What is the primary function of an output unit?
    a) To receive data from external devices.
    b) To convert data into computer-acceptable format.
    c) To provide information from the computer to an external device.
    d) To store data permanently.
    Answer: c) To provide information from the computer to an external device.

2.  Output units present information in the form of:
    a) Binary code only
    b) Raw electrical signals
    c) Soft/hard copy readable by users
    d) Internal memory addresses
    Answer: c) Soft/hard copy readable by users

3.  Which of the following is the responsibility of a logical unit in CPU?
    a) To perform complex Mathematical Problems.
    b) To provide output in the monitor.
    c) To Compare numbers.
    d) To process the input information.
    Answer: c) To Compare numbers.

4.  Which of the following refers to a standard interface for connecting a motherboard to storage devices such as hard drives and CD ROM/DVD drives?
    a) USB
    b) IDE
    c) HWA
    d) PCS
    Answer: b) IDE

5.  Integrated Drive Electronics (IDE) is also known as:
    a) Universal Serial Bus (USB)
    b) Advanced Technology Attachment (ATA)
    c) Peripheral Component Interconnect (PCI)
    d) Small Computer System Interface (SCSI)
    Answer: b) Advanced Technology Attachment (ATA)

6.  Which of the following is NOT true about RAM?
    a) RAM stores certain fixed routines such as the boot-up routines.
    b) RAM is volatile, which means when the computer is switched off, the contents are lost.
    c) The contents of RAM can be changed or deleted.
    d) Both (a) and (b)
    Answer: a) RAM stores certain fixed routines such as the boot-up routines. (The statement "RAM scores certain fixed routines such as the boot – up routines" is false, as boot-up routines are typically stored in ROM/BIOS. The question asks what is NOT true. Option (1) implies RAM stores boot-up routines, which is false. Option (3) states "The contents cannot be changed or deleted," which is also false for RAM. Therefore, both (1) and (3) are not true. Looking at the provided solution, (4) is the answer, meaning both (1) and (3) are the incorrect statements about RAM. My analysis indicates both (1) and (3) are false statements about RAM, so (4) is correct.)

7.  Which part of primary storage holds a software program and small amounts of data when they are brought from secondary storage?
    a) ROM
    b) Register
    c) Cache
    d) RAM
    Answer: d) RAM

8.  The storage area for the next likely data or instruction to be processed, preventing bottleneck and slowing of the system, is known as:
    a) Backing Storage
    b) Buffer
    c) Main Storage
    d) Cache
    Answer: d) Cache

9.  A peripheral device links to a computer system to:
    a) Replace the core computer architecture
    b) Enhance the functionality of the computer
    c) Store permanent data only
    d) Process internal calculations
    Answer: b) Enhance the functionality of the computer

10. Which of the following is NOT a type of peripheral device?
    a) Input devices
    b) Output devices
    c) Storage devices
    d) Central Processing Unit
    Answer: d) Central Processing Unit

11. Input devices serve as a link between:
    a) The CPU and output devices
    b) A user and the computer
    c) Hardware and software
    d) Primary and secondary storage
    Answer: b) A user and the computer

12. What is the primary function of a keyboard?
    a) To display output on the screen
    b) To process data
    c) To enter data into the computer in both alpha and numeric forms
    d) To store information
    Answer: c) To enter data into the computer in both alpha and numeric forms

13. Which of the following is a toggle key?
    a) Shift
    b) Alt
    c) Caps Lock
    d) Ctrl
    Answer: c) Caps Lock

14. What does the Num Lock key do?
    a) Capitalizes all letters
    b) Makes sure numbers are input from the keypad
    c) Allows the arrow keys to scroll through window contents
    d) Changes brightness
    Answer: b) Makes sure numbers are input from the keypad

15. Which of the following is a modifier key?
    a) Num Lock
    b) Scroll Lock
    c) Shift
    d) F1
    Answer: c) Shift

16. The Control (Ctrl) key is primarily used for:
    a) Capitalizing letters
    b) Entering keyboard shortcuts
    c) Scrolling through window contents
    d) Adjusting volume
    Answer: b) Entering keyboard shortcuts

17. What are F1 - F12 keys on a keyboard known as?
    a) Toggle Keys
    b) Modifier Keys
    c) Function Keys
    d) Navigation Keys
    Answer: c) Function Keys

18. The Escape Key is often used to:
    a) Save a document
    b) Print a page
    c) Quit, cancel, or abort a process
    d) Open a new window
    Answer: c) Quit, cancel, or abort a process

19. Which input device is a pointing and cursor-control device with a round ball at its base?
    a) Joy Stick
    b) Track Ball
    c) Mouse
    d) Light Pen
    Answer: c) Mouse

20. A mouse typically has how many buttons?
    a) One
    b) Two or three
    c) Four
    d) Five
    Answer: b) Two or three

21. Which input device is mainly used in Computer Aided Design (CAD) and playing games on the computer?
    a) Mouse
    b) Track Ball
    c) Joy Stick
    d) Scanner
    Answer: c) Joy Stick

22. Which input device is mostly used in notebooks or laptops and allows pointer movement by moving fingers on a half-inserted ball?
    a) Mouse
    b) Joy Stick
    c) Track Ball
    d) Touch Screen
    Answer: c) Track Ball

23. Which device captures images from printed material and converts it into a digital format?
    a) Printer
    b) Monitor
    c) Scanner
    d) Plotter
    Answer: c) Scanner

24. A Barcode Reader translates optical impulses into electrical impulses to store data into the computer. It is an important tool for:
    a) Graphic design
    b) Software development
    c) Warehouse management and operations
    d) Video editing
    Answer: c) Warehouse management and operations

25. Which character recognition system uses special ink and characters to verify the legitimacy of paper documents, especially cheques?
    a) OCR
    b) OMR
    c) MICR
    d) HVD
    Answer: c) MICR

26. Which technology recognizes text within a digital image and converts the document to an editable text file?
    a) MICR
    b) OMR
    c) OCR
    d) Barcode Reader
    Answer: c) OCR

27. An electronic method that scans documents and reads data from marked fields, transmitting results to the computer, is known as:
    a) OCR
    b) MICR
    c) OMR
    d) Digitizer
    Answer: c) OMR

28. Which input device is also known as a graphics tablet and allows users to draw and manipulate graphics on the screen, typically designed for CAD/CAM professionals?
    a) Touch Screen
    b) Light Pen
    c) Digitizer
    d) Web Camera
    Answer: c) Digitizer

29. A computer display screen that serves as an input device, touched by a finger or stylus, is a:
    a) Monitor
    b) Digital Projector
    c) Touch Screen
    d) Plotter
    Answer: c) Touch Screen

30. Which input device translates sound vibrations in the air into electronic signals for audio recording and communication?
    a) Speaker
    b) Web Camera
    c) Microphone
    d) Headphone
    Answer: c) Microphone

31. Which device captures and stores images in digital form, which can then be archived on a photographic compact disc or external hard disk?
    a) Scanner
    b) Digital Camera
    c) Web Camera
    d) Monitor
    Answer: c) Web Camera

32. A light-sensitive input device used to select text, draw pictures, and interact with user interface elements on a screen is a:
    a) Mouse
    b) Track Ball
    c) Light Pen
    d) Joy Stick
    Answer: c) Light Pen

33. Which of the following is a computer hardware?
    a) MS Windows
    b) MacOS
    c) Ubuntu
    d) Printer
    Answer: d) Printer

34. Keyboards convert characters to _______ code.
    a) ASCII
    b) EBCDIC
    c) AMIS
    d) ISO Latin
    Answer: a) ASCII

35. The American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII) represents how many English characters as numbers?
    a) 64
    b) 128
    c) 256
    d) 512
    Answer: b) 128

36. Which of the following refers to the time the alphanumeric key is to be held before the keyboard will repeat itself?
    a) Keyboard Rate
    b) Alphanumeric Rate
    c) Key Rate
    d) Repeat Rate
    Answer: d) Repeat Rate

37. Which of the following is a power protection device that includes a battery providing power for a short period of time?
    a) ESD
    b) EMI
    c) SPIKE
    d) UPS
    Answer: d) UPS

38. What is the name of the temporary data storage area between a peripheral device and CPU which compensates for the difference between their speeds?
    a) Backing Storage
    b) Buffer
    c) Main Storage
    d) Permanent Storage
    Answer: b) Buffer

39. What are the main output devices of a computer that form images from tiny dots arranged in a rectangular form?
    a) Printers
    b) Projectors
    c) Monitors
    d) Speakers
    Answer: c) Monitors

40. The sharpness of an image on a monitor depends on the number of:
    a) Colors
    b) Pixels
    c) Refresh rates
    d) Screen size
    Answer: b) Pixels

41. Which type of monitor display is made up of small picture elements called pixels and creates an image using a beam of electrons?
    a) Flat-Panel Display
    b) Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) Monitor
    c) Cathode-Ray Tube (CRT)
    d) Light Emitting Diode (LED) Monitor
    Answer: c) Cathode-Ray Tube (CRT)

42. Which class of video devices has reduced volume, weight, and power requirements compared to CRTs?
    a) CRT
    b) Flat-Panel Display
    c) LCD Monitor
    d) LED Monitor
    Answer: b) Flat-Panel Display

43. Which monitors use compact fluorescent tubes to illuminate and brighten the image, producing good image quality, resolution, and contrast levels?
    a) CRT Monitor
    b) LED Monitor
    c) Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) Monitor
    d) OLED Monitor
    Answer: c) Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) Monitor

44. Which monitors use new backlighting technology to improve picture quality, offering improved contrast ratios and color saturation over LCD?
    a) LCD Monitor
    b) Organic Light Emitting Diode (OLED) Monitor
    c) Light Emitting Diode (LED) Monitor
    d) CRT Monitor
    Answer: c) Light Emitting Diode (LED) Monitor

45. Which type of monitor uses organic material to convert electric current into light and does not need a backlight, saving power and space?
    a) LCD Monitor
    b) LED Monitor
    c) Organic Light Emitting Diode (OLED) Monitor
    d) CRT Monitor
    Answer: c) Organic Light Emitting Diode (OLED) Monitor

46. What are the two main types of printers?
    a) Color and Monochrome
    b) Desktop and Network
    c) Impact and Non-impact printers
    d) Laser and Inkjet
    Answer: c) Impact and Non-impact printers

47. Which type of printer prints characters by striking them on a ribbon, which is then pressed on the paper?
    a) Non-Impact Printers
    b) Laser Printers
    c) Impact Printers
    d) Inkjet Printers
    Answer: c) Impact Printers

48. Which of the following is an example of an Impact Printer?
    a) Laser Printer
    b) Inkjet Printer
    c) Dot-Matrix Printer
    d) Solid Ink Printer
    Answer: c) Dot-Matrix Printer

49. Dot-Matrix Printers typically have how many pins on their print head?
    a) 5-8 pins
    b) 9-24 pins
    c) 30-50 pins
    d) Over 100 pins
    Answer: b) 9-24 pins

50. The speed of Dot-Matrix Printers is measured in:
    a) ppm (pages per minute)
    b) lpm (lines per minute)
    c) cps (characters per second)
    d) dpi (dots per inch)
    Answer: c) cps (characters per second)

51. An impact printer that can print one line of text at a time is also known as a:
    a) Dot-Matrix Printer
    b) Daisy wheel printer
    c) Line Printer (or bar printer)
    d) Drum printer
    Answer: c) Line Printer (or bar printer)

52. Which type of printer prints characters on paper without using a ribbon and prints a complete page at a time?
    a) Impact Printers
    b) Dot-Matrix Printers
    c) Non-Impact Printers
    d) Drum Printers
    Answer: c) Non-Impact Printers

53. Which of the following is an example of a Non-Impact Printer?
    a) Dot-Matrix Printer
    b) Line Printer
    c) Laser Printer
    d) Daisy wheel printer
    Answer: c) Laser Printer

54. The type of ink used in a laser printer is:
    a) Wet
    b) Solid
    c) Dry
    d) Gel
    Answer: c) Dry

55. The resolution of laser printers is measured in:
    a) cps (characters per second)
    b) lpm (lines per minute)
    c) dpi (dots-per-inch)
    d) ppm (pages per minute)
    Answer: c) dpi (dots-per-inch)

56. Inkjet printers work by:
    a) Striking characters on a ribbon
    b) Melting solid ink
    c) Spraying ink on a sheet of paper
    d) Using a laser beam
    Answer: c) Spraying ink on a sheet of paper

57. The type of ink used in an inkjet printer is:
    a) Dry
    b) Solid
    c) Wet
    d) Powder
    Answer: c) Wet

58. Which type of printer works by melting solid ink and applying the images to the paper?
    a) Inkjet Printer
    b) Laser Printer
    c) Solid Ink Printer
    d) LED Printer
    Answer: c) Solid Ink Printer

59. Which type of printer uses a light emitting diode instead of a laser and creates a line-by-line image of the page?
    a) Solid Ink Printer
    b) Inkjet Printer
    c) LED Printer
    d) Dot-Matrix Printer
    Answer: c) LED Printer

60. Which of the following printers cannot print graphics?
    a) Ink Jet Printer
    b) Laser Printer
    c) Daisy Wheel Printer
    d) Both (a) & (b)
    Answer: c) Daisy Wheel Printer

61. What is an output device used to produce hard copies of large graphs and designs on paper, such as construction drawings and architectural plans?
    a) Printer
    b) Monitor
    c) Plotter
    d) Projector
    Answer: c) Plotter

62. Which type of plotter wraps the paper around a drum with a pin feed attachment and rotates the paper as pens move across it?
    a) Flatbed plotter
    b) Drum plotter
    c) Inkjet plotter
    d) Laser plotter
    Answer: b) Drum plotter

63. A Drum plotter is also known as a:
    a) Table Plotter
    b) Roller Plotter
    c) Flat Plotter
    d) Pen Plotter
    Answer: b) Roller Plotter

64. Which type of plotter plots on paper that is spread and fixed over a rectangular flatbed table and is used in the design of cars, ships, and buildings?
    a) Drum plotter
    b) Roller Plotter
    c) Flatbed plotter
    d) Chain plotter
    Answer: c) Flatbed plotter

65. A Flatbed plotter is also known as a:
    a) Drum Plotter
    b) Roller Plotter
    c) Table Plotter
    d) Band Plotter
    Answer: c) Table Plotter

66. What are transducers that convert electromagnetic waves into sound waves, used as output devices with computers?
    a) Microphones
    b) Web Cameras
    c) Speakers
    d) Plotters
    Answer: c) Speakers

67. Which device connects with a computer and projects the output onto a white screen or wall?
    a) Monitor
    b) Printer
    c) Digital Projector
    d) Scanner
    Answer: c) Digital Projector

68. Which among the following options specifies this action: Holding the mouse button down while moving an object of text?
    a) Highlighting
    b) Dropping
    c) Moving
    d) Dragging
    Answer: d) Dragging



OPERATING SYSTEM

1.  What is an Operating System (OS)?
    a) A hardware component
    b) A peripheral device
    c) A program that acts as an interface between a computer user and computer hardware
    d) A type of application software
    Answer: c) A program that acts as an interface between a computer user and computer hardware

2.  Which of the following is an example of an Operating System?
    a) Microsoft Word
    b) Photoshop
    c) Linux (Ubuntu)
    d) Google Chrome
    Answer: c) Linux (Ubuntu)

3.  Apple’s latest operating system mentioned in the text is:
    a) iOS
    b) Chrome OS
    c) macOS Mojave
    d) Windows 10
    Answer: c) macOS Mojave

4.  Which of the following is NOT listed as a function of operating systems?
    a) Memory Management
    b) Data Encryption
    c) Device Management
    d) Security
    Answer: b) Data Encryption

5.  The process of controlling and coordinating computer memory, conveying memory blocks to various running programs, is known as:
    a) Process Management
    b) Device Management
    c) Memory Management
    d) File Management
    Answer: c) Memory Management

6.  Which function of the OS allocates the processor (CPU) to a process and de-allocates it when no longer essential?
    a) Memory Management
    b) Process Management
    c) Device Management
    d) Job Accounting
    Answer: b) Process Management

7.  The Input/output controller, which decides which process gets the device, when, and for how long, is part of:
    a) File Management
    b) Storage Management
    c) Device Management
    d) Security
    Answer: c) Device Management

8.  Which function of the OS keeps track of information, location, uses, status of resources, and whose collective facilities are known as a file system?
    a) Process Management
    b) File Management
    c) Device Management
    d) Job Accounting
    Answer: b) File Management

9.  Disk scheduling, Storage allocation, and Free space management are activities in:
    a) Memory Management
    b) Process Management
    c) Storage Management
    d) File Management
    Answer: c) Storage Management

10. Which function of the OS controls the unauthorized access of programs, processes, and data resources by means of passwords?
    a) Job Accounting
    b) Error Detecting Aids
    c) Security
    d) Control System Performance
    Answer: c) Security

11. What function of the OS keeps track of time and resources used by various users and processes?
    a) Security
    b) Coordination between other software and users
    c) Job Accounting
    d) Error Detecting Aids
    Answer: c) Job Accounting

12. Production of dumps, traces, error messages, and other debugging techniques are part of which OS function?
    a) Job Accounting
    b) Control System Performance
    c) Error Detecting Aids
    d) Device Management
    Answer: c) Error Detecting Aids

13. Which of the following is a disadvantage of a Batch Operating System?
    a) High interaction between user and job
    b) Fast process speed
    c) The CPU is in idle condition
    d) Low waiting time for the job
    Answer: c) The CPU is in idle condition

14. Multiprogramming Operating Systems allow users to:
    a) Interact directly with the computer for each job
    b) Execute several programs simultaneously
    c) Use only one program at a time
    d) Prepare jobs on off-line devices like punch cards
    Answer: b) Execute several programs simultaneously

15. A disadvantage of a Multiprogramming Operating System is:
    a) Less reliability
    b) The waiting time for the job is high
    c) Limited utility
    d) No interaction with the user
    Answer: b) The waiting time for the job is high

16. What is a logical extension of multiprogramming that enables many people at various terminals to use a computer system at the same time?
    a) Batch Operating System
    b) Distributed Operating System
    c) Timesharing/Multitasking Operating System
    d) Single-user operating System
    Answer: c) Timesharing/Multitasking Operating System

17. Unix is an example of which type of operating system?
    a) Batch Operating System
    b) Distributed Operating System
    c) Timesharing OS
    d) Real-Time Operating System
    Answer: c) Timesharing OS

18. A disadvantage of Time-sharing Operating Systems is:
    a) Reduced load on the host computer
    b) Better service to customers
    c) Less Reliability
    d) Reduced delays in data processing
    Answer: c) Less Reliability

19. Which type of operating system allows multiple users on different computers or terminals to access a single system with one OS on it, and processors communicate through communication lines?
    a) Timesharing Operating System
    b) Single-user operating System
    c) Distributed Operating System
    d) Real-Time Operating System
    Answer: c) Distributed Operating System

20. Distributed Operating Systems are referred to as:
    a) Tightly coupled systems
    b) Closely integrated systems
    c) Loosely coupled systems
    d) Centralized systems
    Answer: c) Loosely coupled systems

21. Which type of operating system supports a single user at any given time?
    a) Multiprogramming Operating System
    b) Timesharing Operating System
    c) Distributed Operating System
    d) Single-user operating System
    Answer: d) Single-user operating System

22. Windows 95 and Windows XP are examples of:
    a) Multitasking Operating Systems
    b) Distributed Operating Systems
    c) Single User Operating Systems
    d) Real-Time Operating Systems
    Answer: c) Single User Operating Systems

23. Which operating system type is a data processing system where the time interval required to process and respond to inputs is small, often used in scientific experiments and industrial control systems?
    a) Batch Operating System
    b) Timesharing Operating System
    c) Real-Time Operating System
    d) Single-user operating System
    Answer: c) Real-Time Operating System

24. Which of the following is an example of a Real-Time Operating System?
    a) Windows XP
    b) Unix
    c) RT Linux
    d) macOS Mojave
    Answer: c) RT Linux

25. In which type of real-time system do critical tasks complete on time, secondary storage is limited, and data is stored in ROM, with virtual memory almost never found?
    a) Soft real-time systems
    b) Hard real-time systems
    c) Embedded real-time systems
    d) Distributed real-time systems
    Answer: b) Hard real-time systems

26. Industrial control applications and Robots are examples of systems using:
    a) Soft real-time systems
    b) Hard real-time systems
    c) General-purpose operating systems
    d) Batch operating systems
    Answer: b) Hard real-time systems

27. In which type of real-time system is the time constraint less strict, and a critical real-time task gets priority and retains it until completion?
    a) Hard real-time systems
    b) Soft real-time systems
    c) Critical real-time systems
    d) Embedded real-time systems
    Answer: b) Soft real-time systems

28. Multimedia, Virtual reality, and Advanced Scientific Projects like undersea exploration are examples of systems using:
    a) Hard real-time systems
    b) Soft real-time systems
    c) Batch operating systems
    d) Single-user operating systems
    Answer: b) Soft real-time systems

29. Android is an operating system owned and maintained by:
    a) Apple
    b) Microsoft
    c) Google
    d) IBM
    Answer: c) Google

30. The process of loading the operating system when the computer starts is known as:
    a) Logging in
    b) Shutting down
    c) Booting
    d) Installing
    Answer: c) Booting

31. Turning ON the computer from an OFF position is called:
    a) Warm Booting
    b) Restarting
    c) Cold Booting
    d) Soft Reset
    Answer: c) Cold Booting

32. A computer system starts up/reset from a complete powerless state is called:
    a) Cold Booting
    b) Warm Booting
    c) Shutdown
    d) Sleep Mode
    Answer: a) Cold Booting (The provided text gives "Warm Boot - A computer system starts up/reset from a complete powerless state is called Warm Booting." This definition of Warm Booting is typically associated with a "cold boot" (starting from off). A "warm boot" usually refers to restarting a running computer without powering down. However, strictly adhering to the provided text, the answer is "Warm Booting." Given the context of the previous question about Cold Boot, this seems like an error in the source material, but I must adhere to the provided text.)
    Revisiting question 32 based on the solution provided in the initial text for Q1 in "Answer Keys": The initial text for Q1 in the "Answer Keys" states "Cold boot is the process of starting a computer from shutdown or a powerless state and setting it to normal working condition. A cold boot refers to the general process of starting the hardware components of a computer, laptop or server to the point that its operating system and all start up applications and services are launched. Cold boot is also known as hard boot, cold start or dead start." This directly contradicts the "Warm Boot" definition in the "Other Terms related to Operating System" section. Given the solution for Q1 in the "Answer Keys" clearly defines "Cold Boot" as starting from a powerless state, I will prioritize that consistent definition.

    Therefore, the corrected answer for Q32:
    A computer system starts up/reset from a complete powerless state is called:
    a) Cold Booting
    b) Warm Booting
    c) Shutdown
    d) Sleep Mode
    Answer: a) Cold Booting (Based on the consistent definition given in the Solutions section for Q1.)

33. Firmware is a software program that is written to a:
    a) Software application
    b) Cloud server
    c) Hardware device
    d) Peripheral device
    Answer: c) Hardware device

34. What is a software layer situated between applications and operating systems that enables communication and data management for distributed applications?
    a) Firmware
    b) Middleware
    c) Driver
    d) Compiler
    Answer: b) Middleware

35. The feature that opens a window on your desktop where you can browse for files stored on your computer is called as:
    a) Device Manager
    b) File Explorer
    c) Web Browser
    d) Utility Software
    Answer: b) File Explorer

36. In MS-DOS 6.22, which part identifies the product uniquely?
    a) MS
    b) DOS
    c) MS-DOS
    d) 6.22
    Answer: d) 6.22

37. Each time you turn on your computer, it will check on which of the following MS-DOS control files?
    a) Command.com
    b) io.sys
    c) msdos.sys
    d) All the above
    Answer: d) All the above

38. A group of instructions that instructs a computer to do specific tasks and enables the user to interact with a computer is called:
    a) Hardware
    b) Operating System
    c) Software
    d) Data
    Answer: c) Software

39. Which of the following is NOT a type of system software?
    a) Operating System
    b) Utility Programs
    c) Device drivers
    d) Application Software
    Answer: d) Application Software

40. System software is also known as:
    a) Productivity applications
    b) Specialized software
    c) Background software
    d) End-user programs
    Answer: c) Background software

41. Which type of system software helps to manage, maintain, and control computer resources and is also known as service programs?
    a) Operating System
    b) Utility Programs
    c) Device Drivers
    d) Language Translators
    Answer: b) Utility Programs

42. Antivirus software, backup software, and disk defragmenters are examples of:
    a) Operating Systems
    b) Device Drivers
    c) Utility Programs
    d) Application Software
    Answer: c) Utility Programs

43. A software designed to enable interaction with hardware devices and control a device attached to your computer is called a:
    a) Utility Program
    b) Language Translator
    c) Device Driver
    d) Application Software
    Answer: c) Device Driver

44. Which type of system software translates a high-level language program (input) into an equivalent machine language program (output) and reports errors?
    a) Operating System
    b) Utility Program
    c) Device Driver
    d) Language Translator
    Answer: d) Language Translator

45. Which of the following is a type of Language Translator?
    a) Microsoft Office
    b) Photoshop
    c) Assembler
    d) Google Chrome
    Answer: c) Assembler

46. What converts an assembly language program into machine language?
    a) Compiler
    b) Interpreter
    c) Assembler
    d) Debugger
    Answer: c) Assembler

47. Which language translator converts the program in a high-level language into low-level language and reports all the errors along with the line numbers?
    a) Assembler
    b) Compiler
    c) Interpreter
    d) Debugger
    Answer: b) Compiler

48. Languages like C and C++ use which type of language translator?
    a) Assembler
    b) Compiler
    c) Interpreter
    d) Linker
    Answer: b) Compiler

49. Which language translator translates line by line and reports the error once after completing the translation process, offering better error diagnostics than a compiler?
    a) Assembler
    b) Compiler
    c) Interpreter
    d) Loader
    Answer: c) Interpreter

50. Python, BASIC, and Ruby use which type of language translator?
    a) Compiler
    b) Assembler
    c) Interpreter
    d) Linker
    Answer: c) Interpreter

51. Software designed for end users to complete tasks such as creating documents, spreadsheets, and databases is called:
    a) System Software
    b) Utility Software
    c) Application Software
    d) Operating System
    Answer: c) Application Software

52. Word processors, spreadsheets, and presentation graphics are common types of:
    a) Specialized application software
    b) Basic application software
    c) System software
    d) Utility programs
    Answer: b) Basic application software

53. Microsoft Office 2016 is an example of:
    a) Specialized application software
    b) Basic application software
    c) System software
    d) Operating system
    Answer: b) Basic application software

54. Software designed for a specific task rather than a wide application area, such as graphics programs and audio/video editors, is known as:
    a) Basic application software
    b) Specialized application software
    c) System utility
    d) General purpose software
    Answer: b) Specialized application software

55. Bookmarks can be managed using:
    a) Extensions Manager
    b) Cast
    c) Bookmarks Manager
    d) Downloads Manager
    Answer: c) Bookmarks Manager

56. Which line describes the contents of the message while sending an e-mail?
    a) Cc
    b) Bcc
    c) Subject
    d) To
    Answer: c) Subject

57. Which programming language deals with a computer's hardware and its configuration, being very close to the computer’s native language?
    a) High-Level Language
    b) Object-Oriented Programming Language
    c) Low-Level Language
    d) Scripting Language
    Answer: c) Low-Level Language

58. Machine Language consists of:
    a) Alphanumeric symbols
    b) English words
    c) Binary digits or bits
    d) Mathematical symbols
    Answer: c) Binary digits or bits

59. Which type of language can be directly understood by the computer and does not need a translator program?
    a) Assembly Language
    b) High-Level Language
    c) Machine Language
    d) Symbolic Programming Language
    Answer: c) Machine Language

60. What is a disadvantage of Machine Language?
    a) Programs run slow
    b) Requires a translation program
    c) Difficult to program
    d) Easy to debug
    Answer: c) Difficult to program

61. In Assembly Language, operation codes and operands are given in the form of alphanumeric symbols known as:
    a) Binary codes
    b) Object codes
    c) Mnemonic codes
    d) Source codes
    Answer: c) Mnemonic codes

62. Assembly Language is also known as:
    a) Machine Code
    b) Symbolic Programming Language
    c) High-Level Language
    d) Object-Oriented Language
    Answer: b) Symbolic Programming Language

63. What is a disadvantage of Assembly Language?
    a) It is difficult to understand
    b) Finding and correcting errors is difficult
    c) It is machine dependent
    d) Writing code is fast
    Answer: c) It is machine dependent

64. Which type of programming language is closer to human languages and uses English and mathematical symbols for program construction?
    a) Low-Level Language
    b) Assembly Language
    c) High-Level Language
    d) Machine Language
    Answer: c) High-Level Language

65. Which of the following is an example of a High-Level Language?
    a) Machine Code
    b) Assembly Language
    c) FORTRAN
    d) Binary
    Answer: c) FORTRAN

66. Beginner's All-purpose Symbolic Instruction Code (BASIC) was designed by:
    a) Niklaus Wirth
    b) John Kemeney and Thomas Kurtz
    c) Dennis Ritchie
    d) James Gosling
    Answer: b) John Kemeney and Thomas Kurtz

67. ALGOL is a short form of:
    a) Analytical Language
    b) Algorithmic Language
    c) Advanced Logic
    d) Algebraic Language
    Answer: b) Algorithmic Language

68. PROLOG is widely used for:
    a) Business and administrative purposes
    b) Numeric computation and scientific computing
    c) Artificial intelligence applications, particularly expert systems
    d) Teaching programming techniques
    Answer: c) Artificial intelligence applications, particularly expert systems

69. Which language was developed by Niklaus Wirth and is used to teach programming techniques?
    a) BASIC
    b) ALGOL
    c) PASCAL
    d) COBOL
    Answer: c) PASCAL

70. FORTRAN is a programming language designed for:
    a) Business and administrative purposes
    b) Numeric computation and scientific computing
    c) Object-oriented programming
    d) Web development
    Answer: b) Numeric computation and scientific computing

71. The full form of COBOL is:
    a) Common Basic Object-Oriented Language
    b) Computer Business Operations Language
    c) Common Business Oriented Language
    d) Core Business Operating Language
    Answer: c) Common Business Oriented Language

72. Which language is used for business and administrative purposes and can be read like regular English?
    a) FORTRAN
    b) C++
    c) COBOL
    d) PASCAL
    Answer: c) COBOL

73. C++ is an object-oriented programming language that incorporates all the features offered by:
    a) Java
    b) Python
    c) C
    d) BASIC
    Answer: c) C

74. Which of the following is an advantage of High-Level Languages?
    a) Difficult to program
    b) Machine dependent
    c) Independent of machines and can run on any computer
    d) Requires no translation
    Answer: c) Independent of machines and can run on any computer

75. What is a software programming model built around objects that classifies data into objects and describes object contents and performance through the declaration of classes?
    a) Procedural Programming
    b) Functional Programming
    c) Object-Oriented Programming (OOP)
    d) Logic Programming
    Answer: c) Object-Oriented Programming (OOP)

76. Which was the first object-oriented programming language?
    a) Java
    b) C++
    c) Simula
    d) Python
    Answer: c) Simula

77. Which of the following is an example of an object-oriented programming language?
    a) FORTRAN
    b) BASIC
    c) Java
    d) COBOL
    Answer: c) Java

78. Java is used for developing:
    a) Only desktop applications
    b) Only server-side applications
    c) Mobile, Desktop, web, server-side and dynamic web applications
    d) Only scientific computations
    Answer: c) Mobile, Desktop, web, server-side and dynamic web applications

79. JavaScript is primarily designed for:
    a) Developing complex scientific applications
    b) Styling HTML Pages, interactivity to HTML Pages, Server-Side Scripting Operation
    c) Building Windows applications
    d) Creating expert systems
    Answer: b) Styling HTML Pages, interactivity to HTML Pages, Server-Side Scripting Operation

80. Python is a general-purpose programming language used for:
    a) Business and administrative purposes
    b) Developing apps on the Microsoft platform
    c) Developing complex scientific, numeric applications, data analysis, and visualization
    d) Styling HTML pages
    Answer: c) Developing complex scientific, numeric applications, data analysis, and visualization

81. Which general-purpose language was designed by Microsoft to be used for developing apps on the Microsoft platform?
    a) Java
    b) Python
    c) C#
    d) PHP
    Answer: c) C#

82. PHP stands for:
    a) Personal Home Page
    b) Hypertext Pre-processor
    c) Pre-Hypertext Processor
    d) Programming Home Page
    Answer: b) Hypertext Pre-processor

83. Which scripting language is used for the development of web applications?
    a) C#
    b) Visual Basic
    c) PHP
    d) .NET
    Answer: c) PHP

84. Who is the inventor/designer of C/C++?
    a) James Gosling
    b) Brendan Eich
    c) Dennis Ritchie
    d) Guido van Rossum
    Answer: c) Dennis Ritchie

85. Who is the inventor/designer of Java?
    a) Dennis Ritchie
    b) James Gosling
    c) Brendan Eich
    d) Yukihiro Matsumoto
    Answer: b) James Gosling

86. Who is the inventor/designer of JavaScript?
    a) James Gosling
    b) Brendan Eich
    c) Rasmus Lerdorf
    d) Larry Wall
    Answer: b) Brendan Eich

87. Who is the inventor/designer of PHP?
    a) Guido van Rossum
    b) Rasmus Lerdorf
    c) Tim Berners-Lee
    d) Microsoft Corporation
    Answer: b) Rasmus Lerdorf

88. Who is the inventor/designer of Python?
    a) Brendan Eich
    b) Guido van Rossum
    c) Larry Wall
    d) Yukihiro Matsumoto
    Answer: b) Guido van Rossum

89. Who is the inventor/designer of HTML?
    a) Bill Gates
    b) Steve Jobs
    c) Tim Berners-Lee
    d) Linus Torvalds
    Answer: c) Tim Berners-Lee

90. Which corporation developed the .NET (Framework) and C#?
    a) Google
    b) Apple
    c) Microsoft Corporation
    d) IBM
    Answer: c) Microsoft Corporation

91. Who is the inventor/designer of Perl?
    a) Yukihiro Matsumoto
    b) Larry Wall
    c) Rasmus Lerdorf
    d) James Gosling
    Answer: b) Larry Wall

92. Who is the inventor/designer of Ruby?
    a) Guido van Rossum
    b) Yukihiro Matsumoto
    c) Brendan Eich
    d) Dennis Ritchie
    Answer: b) Yukihiro Matsumoto

93. A software designed to perform tasks such as processing program code to machine code is called a:
    a) Debugger
    b) Linker
    c) Loader
    d) Language Processor
    Answer: d) Language Processor

94. Which software utility is designed to locate errors within a program's source code?
    a) Language Processor
    b) Linker
    c) Loader
    d) Debugger
    Answer: d) Debugger

95. A program that combines object modules to form an executable program is called a:
    a) Debugger
    b) Linker
    c) Loader
    d) Compiler
    Answer: b) Linker

96. What brings all program objects into the memory that is essential to run a program?
    a) Linker
    b) Loader
    c) Debugger
    d) Compiler
    Answer: b) Loader

97. The process in which data is temporarily held to be used and executed by a device, program, or the system, saving data in storage until the program requests it, is called:
    a) Buffering
    b) Caching
    c) Spooling
    d) Paging
    Answer: c) Spooling




STORAGE UNIT

1.  What is the smallest unit of memory storage, represented logically by 0 and 1?
    a) Nibble
    b) Byte
    c) Bit (Binary Digit)
    d) Word
    Answer: c) Bit (Binary Digit)

2.  A group of 4 bits is called a:
    a) Byte
    b) Word
    c) Nibble
    d) Kilobyte
    Answer: c) Nibble

3.  A group of 8 bits is called a:
    a) Nibble
    b) Byte
    c) Word
    d) Kilobyte
    Answer: b) Byte

4.  What is a computer word?
    a) A single bit
    b) A group of 4 bits
    c) A group with a fixed number of bits processed as a unit
    d) A group of 1024 bytes
    Answer: c) A group with a fixed number of bits processed as a unit

5.  The length of a computer word is called:
    a) Bit size
    b) Nibble length
    c) Word-size or word length
    d) Byte length
    Answer: c) Word-size or word length

6.  A computer stores information in the form of:
    a) Binary digits only
    b) Nibbles
    c) Bytes
    d) Computer words
    Answer: d) Computer words

7.  How many bits are in 1 byte?
    a) 4
    b) 8
    c) 16
    d) 32
    Answer: b) 8

8.  1 Kilobyte (KB) is equal to approximately how many bytes?
    a) 8
    b) 1000
    c) 1024
    d) 10^6
    Answer: c) 1024 bytes

9.  1 Megabyte (MB) is equal to:
    a) 1024 bits
    b) 1024 bytes
    c) 1024 KB
    d) 1024 MB
    Answer: c) 1024 KB

10. Which of the following arrangements is correctly placed in ascending order?
    (a) KB < MB < GB < TB
    (b) Byte < MB < EB < PB
    (c) Nibble < KB < MB < PB
    (1) Only (a)
    (2) Only (b)
    (3) Only (c)
    (4) Both (a) & (b)
    (5) Both (a) & (c)
    Answer: (5) Both (a) & (c)

11. What is a technique to represent and work with numbers?
    a) Logic Gate
    b) Number System
    c) Memory Unit
    d) Data Abstraction
    Answer: b) Number System

12. The most widely adopted number system, which has 10 digits (0-9), is the:
    a) Binary number system
    b) Octal number system
    c) Hexadecimal number system
    d) Decimal number system
    Answer: d) Decimal number system

13. The base (radix) of the Binary number system is:
    a) 8
    b) 10
    c) 2
    d) 16
    Answer: c) 2

14. The base (radix) of the Hexadecimal number system is:
    a) 8
    b) 10
    c) 2
    d) 16
    Answer: d) 16

15. What are the building blocks of any digital circuit that implement Boolean logic processes?
    a) Memory Units
    b) Number Systems
    c) Logic Gates
    d) Processors
    Answer: c) Logic Gates

16. Which logic gate has two or more inputs and one output and performs logical conjunction?
    a) OR Gate
    b) NOT Gate
    c) AND Gate
    d) XOR Gate
    Answer: c) AND Gate

17. Which logic gate produces inclusive disjunction?
    a) AND Gate
    b) OR Gate
    c) NAND Gate
    d) NOR Gate
    Answer: b) OR Gate

18. Which logic gate is a single input gate and performs the inversion of the given input, also called an Inverter?
    a) AND Gate
    b) OR Gate
    c) NOT Gate
    d) XOR Gate
    Answer: c) NOT Gate

19. Which logic gate is the combination of AND & NOT gates and is the opposite of an AND logic gate?
    a) NOR Gate
    b) XOR Gate
    c) NAND Gate
    d) XNOR Gate
    Answer: c) NAND Gate

20. Which logic gate is the combination of NOT & OR gates, operating on the principle of 'neither this nor that'?
    a) AND Gate
    b) OR Gate
    c) NOR Gate
    d) NAND Gate
    Answer: c) NOR Gate

21. Which special type of logic gate is used in half adder, full adder, subtractor circuits, and for implementing binary addition in computers?
    a) AND Gate
    b) OR Gate
    c) XOR Gate
    d) XNOR Gate
    Answer: c) XOR Gate

22. Which logic gate is a combination of the Exclusive-OR gate and the NOT gate, and has a high output only when an odd number of inputs are high?
    a) AND Gate
    b) OR Gate
    c) XOR Gate
    d) XNOR Gate
    Answer: d) XNOR Gate

23. What is a computer program designed for creating and managing databases, providing a systematic way to run operations like creating, storing, retrieving, and deleting data?
    a) Operating System
    b) Word Processor
    c) Database Management System (DBMS)
    d) Spreadsheet Software
    Answer: c) Database Management System (DBMS)

24. Which of the following is a popularly used DBMS?
    a) Microsoft Word
    b) Google Chrome
    c) MySQL
    d) Photoshop
    Answer: c) MySQL

25. Which of the following is an advantage of DBMS?
    a) Larger in size
    b) Complexity
    c) Licensed DBMS are costly
    d) Reduced Data redundancy
    Answer: d) Reduced Data redundancy

26. The process of masking irrelevant information from users in a database system is known as:
    a) Data Encryption
    b) Data Compression
    c) Data Abstraction
    d) Data Replication
    Answer: c) Data Abstraction

27. The Architecture of commercial DBMS is based on:
    a) ISO standards
    b) ANSI-SPARC database architecture
    c) IEEE guidelines
    d) W3C recommendations
    Answer: b) ANSI-SPARC database architecture

28. What is the lowest level of data abstraction that describes how the data is physically stored in detail?
    a) Logical Level
    b) View Level
    c) Physical Level/Internal Level
    d) Conceptual Level
    Answer: c) Physical Level/Internal Level

29. B+ tree and Hash file organization methods are used in which level of data abstraction?
    a) Logical Level
    b) View Level
    c) Physical Level/Internal Level
    d) External Level
    Answer: c) Physical Level/Internal Level

30. Which level of data abstraction describes what data is stored and what is the relationship among that data, and where database administrators work?
    a) Physical Level
    b) View Level
    c) Logical Level/Conceptual Level
    d) External Level
    Answer: c) Logical Level/Conceptual Level

31. Which is the highest level of abstraction, viewed by the user in terms of tables and relations, and hides the details of the logical level?
    a) Physical Level
    b) Logical Level
    c) View Level/External Level
    d) Internal Level
    Answer: c) View Level/External Level

32. What is a field in a database table used to retrieve and sort rows, and for speeding up data accessing and creating links between different tables?
    a) Attribute
    b) Record
    c) Key
    d) Tuple
    Answer: c) Key

33. Which key is a set of one or more attributes whose values uniquely determine each entity in the database table, and is a subset of a candidate key?
    a) Candidate Key
    b) Primary Key
    c) Super Key
    d) Foreign Key
    Answer: c) Super Key

34. A set of columns in a table from which a primary key can be selected to identify each record is called a:
    a) Super Key
    b) Candidate Key
    c) Primary Key
    d) Alternate Key
    Answer: b) Candidate Key

35. Which special key uniquely identifies each record in a table, has a unique value for each row, and cannot contain null values?
    a) Candidate Key
    b) Composite Key
    c) Primary Key
    d) Foreign Key
    Answer: c) Primary Key

36. A combination of more than one column in a table that can be used to uniquely identify each record is known as a:
    a) Primary Key
    b) Foreign Key
    c) Composite Key (or Compound key)
    d) Super Key
    Answer: c) Composite Key (or Compound key)

37. All keys except the primary key are known as:
    a) Super Keys
    b) Candidate Keys
    c) Alternate Keys (or Secondary Keys)
    d) Foreign Keys
    Answer: c) Alternate Keys (or Secondary Keys)

38. Which key points to the primary key of another table, acts as a reference between tables, and can accept null and duplicate values?
    a) Primary Key
    b) Alternate Key
    c) Foreign Key
    d) Composite Key
    Answer: c) Foreign Key

39. Microsoft Office was introduced by Microsoft in 1989 for which operating systems?
    a) macOS
    b) Linux
    c) Windows
    d) DOS
    Answer: c) Windows

40. Which of the following is NOT an important application software of MS Office mentioned?
    a) MS Word
    b) MS Excel
    c) MS Paint
    d) MS Access
    Answer: c) MS Paint

41. What is a word processing program first made public by Microsoft, widely used for creating, editing, and formatting documents?
    a) MS Excel
    b) MS PowerPoint
    c) Microsoft Word
    d) MS OneNote
    Answer: c) Microsoft Word

42. The feature in MS Word that automatically adjusts all text within the specified margins is called:
    a) Mail merge
    b) Spell check
    c) Word wrapping
    d) Link embedding
    Answer: c) Word wrapping

43. What are the file extensions of MS Word documents?
    a) .txt and .pdf
    b) .xls and .xlsx
    c) .ppt and .pptx
    d) .doc and .docx
    Answer: d) .doc and .docx

44. The bar located at the top of a window that displays the name of the window or document being used is called the:
    a) Quick Access Toolbar
    b) Ribbon
    c) Status Bar
    d) Title Bar
    Answer: d) Title Bar

45. A small, customizable toolbar at the top of the document window, containing commands independent of the displayed tab, is the:
    a) Ribbon
    b) Status Bar
    c) Quick Access Tool Bar
    d) View Toolbar
    Answer: c) Quick Access Tool Bar

46. What is a cluster of toolbars in Microsoft Office used for writing, designing, formatting, and reviewing, displayed by every tab at the top of a document window?
    a) Quick Access Toolbar
    b) Status Bar
    c) Ribbon
    d) Dialog Box Launcher
    Answer: c) Ribbon

47. Which menu section on the Office ribbon gives access to file functions such as Open, Save, Close, and Properties?
    a) Home Tab
    b) Insert Tab
    c) File Menu
    d) View Tab
    Answer: c) File Menu

48. Which is the default tab in Microsoft Word, Microsoft Excel, and Microsoft PowerPoint, allowing changes to font properties and including groups like Clipboard and Font?
    a) Insert Tab
    b) Design Tab
    c) Home Tab
    d) Layout Tab
    Answer: c) Home Tab

49. The Clipboard Group, Font Group, Paragraph Group, Style Group, and Editing Group are found under which tab in MS Word?
    a) Insert Tab
    b) Home Tab
    c) Review Tab
    d) View Tab
    Answer: b) Home Tab

50. The maximum size of Font in a drop-down selection of MS Word is:
    a) 12
    b) 24
    c) 48
    d) 72
    Answer: d) 72

51. Which tab is used to insert different features such as tables, pictures, clip art, shapes, charts, page numbers, and headers/footers into a document?
    a) Home Tab
    b) Design Tab
    c) Insert Tab
    d) Layout Tab
    Answer: c) Insert Tab

52. The Pages Group (Cover page, Blank page, Page break) is available under which tab?
    a) Home Tab
    b) Insert Tab
    c) Layout Tab
    d) References Tab
    Answer: b) Insert Tab

53. Themes, Style Set gallery, Paragraph Spacing, Effects, and Page Background group are included in which tab?
    a) Home Tab
    b) Insert Tab
    c) Design Tab
    d) Layout Tab
    Answer: c) Design Tab

54. The Layout Tab holds buttons used to arrange document pages, including which of the following groups?
    a) Illustrations Group
    b) Media and Links Group
    c) Page Setup Group
    d) Symbol Group
    Answer: c) Page Setup Group

55. Margins, Orientation, Breaks, and Columns are options found in the Page Setup Group under which tab?
    a) Design Tab
    b) References Tab
    c) Layout Tab
    d) View Tab
    Answer: c) Layout Tab

56. Which tab allows you to create a table of contents, footnotes, citations, and cross-references?
    a) Layout Tab
    b) Mailings Tab
    c) References Tab
    d) Review Tab
    Answer: c) References Tab

57. The Table of Contents Group and Footnotes Group are available in which tab?
    a) Design Tab
    b) Mailings Tab
    c) References Tab
    d) View Tab
    Answer: c) References Tab

58. Which tab is ideal for Mail Merging to create form letters or address labels?
    a) References Tab
    b) Review Tab
    c) Mailings Tab
    d) View Tab
    Answer: c) Mailings Tab

59. The Create Group (Envelops, Labels) and Start Mail Merge Group are found in which tab?
    a) Home Tab
    b) Insert Tab
    c) Mailings Tab
    d) Layout Tab
    Answer: c) Mailings Tab

60. Which tab contains tools to improve the document, including Proofing, Comments, Tracking, and Compare groups?
    a) Mailings Tab
    b) Review Tab
    c) View Tab
    d) Help Tab
    Answer: b) Review Tab

61. Spelling & Grammar, Thesaurus, Autocorrect, and word count are features within the Proofing Group under which tab?
    a) Home Tab
    b) Insert Tab
    c) Review Tab
    d) References Tab
    Answer: c) Review Tab

62. Which tab has the functionality to change the document views, including Read mode, Print Layout, and Web Layout?
    a) Review Tab
    b) Help Tab
    c) View Tab
    d) Design Tab
    Answer: c) View Tab

63. The Zoom Group (10% to 500%, Page width, Multiple pages) is available under which tab?
    a) Home Tab
    b) Layout Tab
    c) View Tab
    d) Insert Tab
    Answer: c) View Tab

64. Users can get help anytime in MS Word by using which function key?
    a) F4
    b) F5
    c) F7
    d) F1
    Answer: d) F1

65. What is a horizontal window at the bottom of a parent window that displays various kinds of status information of the document?
    a) Title Bar
    b) Quick Access Toolbar
    c) Ribbon
    d) Status Bar
    Answer: d) Status Bar

66. A button in the corner of a group that launches a dialog box containing all the options within that group is called a:
    a) Quick Access Button
    b) Dialog Box Launcher
    c) View Toolbar
    d) Status Indicator
    Answer: b) Dialog Box Launcher

67. Which option is used to align the text in a document to the right side, left, center, or justified?
    a) Indent
    b) Alignment
    c) Spacing
    d) Shading
    Answer: b) Alignment

68. What temporarily saves text when using the Cut or Copy commands?
    a) Hard Drive
    b) RAM
    c) Clipboard
    d) Cache
    Answer: c) Clipboard

69. Which of the following is a type of design for text?
    a) Alignment
    b) Clipboard
    c) Font
    d) Style
    Answer: c) Font

70. Which command is used to delete the last action in the document?
    a) Redo
    b) Copy
    c) Undo
    d) Cut
    Answer: c) Undo

71. What constantly appears on every page of a document, at the bottom of each page, and can include page numbers or company details?
    a) Header
    b) Title Bar
    c) Footer
    d) Status Bar
    Answer: c) Footer

72. Which command is used to duplicate a section of a document and place it in the clipboard?
    a) Cut
    b) Paste
    c) Copy
    d) Undo
    Answer: c) Copy

73. Which command is used to move a section of text from a document to the clipboard?
    a) Copy
    b) Paste
    c) Cut
    d) Redo
    Answer: c) Cut

74. Which command allows you to copy an object or text from one location and place it to another location?
    a) Cut
    b) Copy
    c) Paste
    d) Duplicate
    Answer: c) Paste

75. Which feature is used to paste an item from the clipboard with custom formatting?
    a) Paste
    b) Paste Special
    c) Format Painter
    d) Append
    Answer: b) Paste Special

76. What is a software tool in MS Word that provides synonyms for selected words on command?
    a) Spell Check
    b) AutoCorrect
    c) Thesaurus
    d) Grammar Check
    Answer: c) Thesaurus

77. Which software feature in MS Word automatically corrects misspellings and common errors?
    a) Spell Check
    b) Thesaurus
    c) AutoCorrect
    d) Grammar Check
    Answer: c) AutoCorrect

78. Which shortcut key is used to select all content in a document?
    a) Ctrl + C
    b) Ctrl + X
    c) Ctrl + A
    d) Ctrl + S
    Answer: c) Ctrl + A

79. Which shortcut key is used to make text bold?
    a) Ctrl + I
    b) Ctrl + U
    c) Ctrl + B
    d) Ctrl + S
    Answer: c) Ctrl + B

80. Which shortcut key is used to paste content?
    a) Ctrl + C
    b) Ctrl + X
    c) Ctrl + V
    d) Ctrl + P
    Answer: c) Ctrl + V

81. Which shortcut key opens a new blank document?
    a) Ctrl + O
    b) Ctrl + S
    c) Ctrl + N
    d) Ctrl + W
    Answer: c) Ctrl + N

82. Which shortcut key is used to cut selected content?
    a) Ctrl + C
    b) Ctrl + V
    c) Ctrl + X
    d) Ctrl + Z
    Answer: c) Ctrl + X

83. Which shortcut key is used to make text italic?
    a) Ctrl + B
    b) Ctrl + U
    c) Ctrl + I
    d) Ctrl + Y
    Answer: c) Ctrl + I

84. Which shortcut key is used to undo the last action?
    a) Ctrl + Y
    b) Ctrl + Z
    c) Ctrl + X
    d) Ctrl + U
    Answer: b) Ctrl + Z

85. Which shortcut key is used to redo an action?
    a) Ctrl + Z
    b) Ctrl + X
    c) Ctrl + Y
    d) Ctrl + S
    Answer: c) Ctrl + Y

86. Which shortcut key is used to open an existing document?
    a) Ctrl + N
    b) Ctrl + S
    c) Ctrl + O
    d) Ctrl + P
    Answer: c) Ctrl + O

87. Which shortcut key is used to save a document?
    a) Ctrl + O
    b) Ctrl + P
    c) Ctrl + S
    d) Ctrl + W
    Answer: c) Ctrl + S

88. Which shortcut key is used to insert a hyperlink?
    a) Ctrl + L
    b) Ctrl + E
    c) Ctrl + K
    d) Ctrl + J
    Answer: c) Ctrl + K

89. Which shortcut key is used for left alignment?
    a) Ctrl + E
    b) Ctrl + R
    c) Ctrl + L
    d) Ctrl + J
    Answer: c) Ctrl + L

90. Which shortcut key is used for center alignment?
    a) Ctrl + L
    b) Ctrl + R
    c) Ctrl + E
    d) Ctrl + J
    Answer: c) Ctrl + E

91. Which shortcut key is used for right alignment?
    a) Ctrl + L
    b) Ctrl + E
    c) Ctrl + R
    d) Ctrl + J
    Answer: c) Ctrl + R

92. Which shortcut key is used to justify the alignment?
    a) Ctrl + L
    b) Ctrl + E
    c) Ctrl + R
    d) Ctrl + J
    Answer: d) Ctrl + J

93. Which shortcut key is used to open the find box?
    a) Ctrl + G
    b) Ctrl + F
    c) Ctrl + W
    d) Ctrl + M
    Answer: b) Ctrl + F

94. Which shortcut key is used to close the current document?
    a) Ctrl + P
    b) Ctrl + M
    c) Ctrl + W
    d) Ctrl + O
    Answer: c) Ctrl + W

95. Which shortcut key is used to indent a paragraph?
    a) Ctrl + L
    b) Ctrl + E
    c) Ctrl + M
    d) Ctrl + J
    Answer: c) Ctrl + M

96. Which shortcut key is used to print a document?
    a) Ctrl + O
    b) Ctrl + S
    c) Ctrl + P
    d) Ctrl + W
    Answer: c) Ctrl + P

97. Which shortcut key increases the font size?
    a) Ctrl + Shift + <
    b) Ctrl + Shift + >
    c) Ctrl + B
    d) Ctrl + I
    Answer: b) Ctrl + Shift + >

98. Which shortcut key decreases the font size?
    a) Ctrl + Shift + >
    b) Ctrl + Shift + <
    c) Ctrl + B
    d) Ctrl + I
    Answer: b) Ctrl + Shift + <

99. Which function key is used for Thesaurus?
    a) F1
    b) F5
    c) F7
    d) Shift+F7
    Answer: d) Shift+F7

100. Which function key is used to refresh the page?
    a) F1
    b) F5
    c) F7
    d) F9
    Answer: b) F5

101. Which function key is used to repeat the last action?
    a) F1
    b) F4
    c) F5
d) F7
    Answer: b) F4

102. Which function key is used for Spell Check?
    a) F1
    b) F5
    c) F7
    d) F9
    Answer: c) F7

103. Which function key is used to go to the next pane?
    a) F5
    b) F6
    c) F7
    d) F8
    Answer: b) F6

104. Which function key is used to extend the selection?
    a) F6
    b) F7
    c) F8
    d) F9
    Answer: c) F8

105. Which function key is used to update the selected fields?
    a) F9
    b) F10
    c) F11
    d) F12
    Answer: a) F9

106. Which function key is used to show Key tips?
    a) F9
    b) F10
    c) F11
    d) F12
    Answer: b) F10

107. Which function key is used to go to the next field?
    a) F10
    b) F11
    c) F12
    d) Shift + F3
    Answer: b) F11

108. Which function key is used for 'Save As'?
    a) F9
    b) F10
    c) F11
    d) F12
    Answer: d) F12

109. Which shortcut key is used to change the case of letters?
    a) Shift + F4
    b) Shift + F3
    c) Ctrl + Shift + >
    d) Ctrl + Shift + <
    Answer: b) Shift + F3

110. Which shortcut key is used to display a shortcut menu?
    a) Shift + F3
    b) Shift + F4
    c) Shift + F10
    d) Ctrl + F2
    Answer: c) Shift + F10

111. Which shortcut key is used to choose Print Preview?
    a) Ctrl + F2
    b) Ctrl + F4
    c) Ctrl + F10
    d) Ctrl + F12
    Answer: a) Ctrl + F2

112. Which shortcut key is used to close the window?
    a) Ctrl + F2
    b) Ctrl + F4
    c) Ctrl + F10
    d) Ctrl + F12
    Answer: b) Ctrl + F4

113. Which shortcut key is used to maximize the document window?
    a) Ctrl + F2
    b) Ctrl + F4
    c) Ctrl + F10
    d) Ctrl + F12
    Answer: c) Ctrl + F10

114. Which shortcut key is used to choose the open button?
    a) Ctrl + F2
    b) Ctrl + F4
    c) Ctrl + F10
    d) Ctrl + F12
    Answer: d) Ctrl + F12

115. Which shortcut key is used to move to the previous object?
    a) Ctrl + G
    b) Ctrl + F
    c) Alt + F5
    d) Ctrl + F2
    Answer: a) Ctrl + G (Based on the text: "Ctrl + G Find and Replace Tab To move to the previous object". Note: Ctrl+G usually opens "Go To" in Find and Replace, not directly moves to previous object globally without further context. But given the options, it's the only one listed in the text for this purpose.)

116. Which shortcut key is used to restore the program window?
    a) Alt + F4
    b) Alt + F5
    c) Alt + F7
    d) Alt + F10
    Answer: b) Alt + F5

117. Which shortcut key is used to find the next misspelling?
    a) Alt + F5
    b) Alt + F7
    c) Alt + F10
    d) F7
    Answer: b) Alt + F7

118. Which shortcut key is used to maximize the program window?
    a) Alt + F5
    b) Alt + F7
    c) Alt + F10
    d) Alt + F4
    Answer: c) Alt + F10

119. Which function key is used to rename a file?
    a) F1
    b) F2
    c) F3
    d) F4
    Answer: b) F2

120. Which shortcut key is used to exit the application?
    a) Ctrl + W
    b) Alt + F4
    c) Ctrl + F4
    d) Ctrl + Q
    Answer: b) Alt + F4

121. Which shortcut key is used to access the Home Tab?
    a) Alt + N
    b) Alt + H
    c) Alt + G
    d) Alt + P
    Answer: b) Alt + H

122. Which shortcut key is used to access the Insert Tab?
    a) Alt + H
    b) Alt + N
    c) Alt + G
    d) Alt + P
    Answer: b) Alt + N

123. Which shortcut key is used to access the Design Tab?
    a) Alt + H
    b) Alt + N
    c) Alt + G
    d) Alt + P
    Answer: c) Alt + G

124. Which shortcut key is used to access the File Page?
    a) Alt + F
    b) Alt + H
    c) Alt + N
    d) Alt + G
    Answer: a) Alt + F

125. Which shortcut key is used to access the Mailings Tab?
    a) Alt + P
    b) Alt + M
    c) Alt + S
    d) Alt + R
    Answer: b) Alt + M

126. Which shortcut key is used to access the Layout Tab?
    a) Alt + H
    b) Alt + N
    c) Alt + P
    d) Alt + G
    Answer: c) Alt + P

127. Which shortcut key is used to access the "Tell me box"?
    a) Alt + R
    b) Alt + Q
    c) Alt + W
    d) Alt + S
    Answer: b) Alt + Q

128. Which shortcut key is used to access the Review Tab?
    a) Alt + P
    b) Alt + M
    c) Alt + R
    d) Alt + W
    Answer: c) Alt + R

129. Which shortcut key is used to access the View Tab?
    a) Alt + R
    b) Alt + W
    c) Alt + S
    d) Alt + F
    Answer: b) Alt + W

130. Which shortcut key is used to access the Reference Tab?
    a) Alt + W
    b) Alt + S
    c) Alt + F
    d) Alt + M
    Answer: b) Alt + S



EXCEL

1.  What is a spreadsheet program used to present and organize copious amounts of data systematically, and to perform basic arithmetic operations and create graphs/charts?
    a) Microsoft Word
    b) Microsoft PowerPoint
    c) Microsoft Excel
    d) Microsoft Access
    Answer: c) Microsoft Excel

2.  What is the file extension of MS Excel files?
    a) .doc
    b) .ppt
    c) .xls
    d) .txt
    Answer: c) .xls

3.  In MS Excel, ribbons are divided into logical groups called:
    a) Panels
    b) Tabs
    c) Sections
    d) Windows
    Answer: b) Tabs

4.  Which of the following is NOT a tab mentioned in MS Excel?
    a) Home
    b) Insert
    c) Drawing
    d) Data
    Answer: c) Drawing

5.  The Excel Home Tab is used to perform common commands such as bold, underline, alignment, copy, and paste. It also allows applying formats to cells in a:
    a) Workbook
    b) Presentation
    c) Document
    d) Database
    Answer: a) Workbook

6.  Which group in the Home Tab of MS Excel contains Paste, Cut, Copy, and Format Painter?
    a) Font Group
    b) Alignment Group
    c) Clipboard Group
    d) Cells Group
    Answer: c) Clipboard Group

7.  Bold, Italic, Underline, Font Style, Color & Size, Fill color, and Borders are features of which group in the Home Tab of MS Excel?
    a) Clipboard Group
    b) Font Group
    c) Alignment Group
    d) Styles Group
    Answer: b) Font Group

8.  Orientation, Wrap Text, and Merge & Center are options within which group in the Home Tab of MS Excel?
    a) Font Group
    b) Alignment Group
    c) Number Group
    d) Editing Group
    Answer: b) Alignment Group

9.  Conditional Formatting, Format as Table, and Cell Styles are features of which group in the Home Tab of MS Excel?
    a) Number Group
    b) Styles Group
    c) Cells Group
    d) Editing Group
    Answer: b) Styles Group

10. Insert cells, Delete cells, and Format cells are commands found in which group under the Home Tab of MS Excel?
    a) Styles Group
    b) Cells Group
    c) Editing Group
    d) Clipboard Group
    Answer: b) Cells Group

11. AutoSum, Sort & Filter, and Find & Select are features of which group in the Home Tab of MS Excel?
    a) Number Group
    b) Styles Group
    c) Cells Group
    d) Editing Group
    Answer: d) Editing Group

12. Which tab in MS Excel is used to insert pictures, charts, filters, and hyperlinks?
    a) Home Tab
    b) Page Layout Tab
    c) Insert Tab
    d) Formulas Tab
    Answer: c) Insert Tab

13. What is the shortcut key to open the Insert Tab in MS Excel?
    a) Alt+H
    b) Alt+P
    c) Alt+N
    d) Alt+F
    Answer: c) Alt+N

14. Pivot Table, Recommended Pivot Tables, and Table are options found in which group under the Insert Tab?
    a) Illustrations Group
    b) Add-ins Group
    c) Tables Group
    d) Charts Group
    Answer: c) Tables Group

15. Pictures, Online pictures, Icons, and Shapes are features of which group under the Insert Tab?
    a) Tables Group
    b) Illustrations Group
    c) Add-ins Group
    d) Text Group
    Answer: b) Illustrations Group

16. Which group in the Insert Tab includes options for Recommended charts, Maps, and Pivot Chart Charts?
    a) Illustrations Group
    b) Add-ins Group
    c) Charts Group
    d) Sparklines Group
    Answer: c) Charts Group

17. Line, Column, and Win/Loss are types of graphics found in which group under the Insert Tab?
    a) Charts Group
    b) Tours Groups
    c) Sparklines Group
    d) Filters Group
    Answer: c) Sparklines Group

18. Slicer and Timeline are options found in which group under the Insert Tab?
    a) Sparklines Group
    b) Filters Group
    c) Links Group
    d) Text Group
    Answer: b) Filters Group

19. There are how many types of charts mentioned in the Charts section under the Insert Tab?
    a) Six
    b) Seven
    c) Eight
    d) Nine
    Answer: c) Eight

20. Which tab in MS Excel is used to change the look of a workbook, including themes, page setup, and sheet options?
    a) Home Tab
    b) Insert Tab
    c) Page Layout Tab
    d) Formulas Tab
    Answer: c) Page Layout Tab

21. Themes, Colors, Fonts, and Effects are features of which group under the Page Layout Tab?
    a) Page Setup Group
    b) Scale to fit Group
    c) Sheet Options Group
    d) Themes Group
    Answer: d) Themes Group

22. Margins, Orientation, Size, Print Area, and Breaks are options found in which group under the Page Layout Tab?
    a) Themes Group
    b) Page Setup Group
    c) Scale to fit Group
    d) Arrange Group
    Answer: b) Page Setup Group

23. Which group under the Page Layout Tab includes options like Gridlines and Headings for sheet display?
    a) Page Setup Group
    b) Scale to fit Group
    c) Sheet Options Group
    d) Arrange Group
    Answer: c) Sheet Options Group

24. Which tab in MS Excel is used to make dynamic reports by using functions, and includes a Function Library and Formula Auditing?
    a) Data Tab
    b) Review Tab
    c) Formulas Tab
    d) View Tab
    Answer: c) Formulas Tab

25. How many functions are available in Excel from Office 2003 to 2013, as stated in the Formulas Tab description?
    a) 100
    b) 250
    c) 461
    d) More than 500
    Answer: c) 461

26. Insert Function, AutoSum, Financial & Logical Function, and Date & Time are part of which group under the Formulas Tab?
    a) Defined Names group
    b) Function Library
    c) Formula Auditing
    d) Calculation Group
    Answer: b) Function Library

27. Trace Precedents & Dependents, Error Checking, and Evaluate Formula are features of which group under the Formulas Tab?
    a) Function Library
    b) Defined Names group
    c) Formula Auditing
    d) Calculation Group
    Answer: c) Formula Auditing

28. Which tab in MS Excel is primarily used for importing a large amount of data from various sources like servers or the web?
    a) Formulas Tab
    b) Review Tab
    c) Data Tab
    d) View Tab
    Answer: c) Data Tab

29. Get Data, From Text/CSV, Web, and Table/Range are options found in which group under the Data Tab?
    a) Queries & Connection Group
    b) Sort & Filter Group
    c) Get & Transform Data Group
    d) Data Tools Group
    Answer: c) Get & Transform Data Group

30. Text to columns, Flash Fill, Remove Duplicates, and Data Validation are tools found in which group under the Data Tab?
    a) Sort & Filter Group
    b) Data Tools Group
    c) Forecast Group
    d) Outline Group
    Answer: b) Data Tools Group

31. What-If Analysis and Forecast Sheet are options in which group under the Data Tab?
    a) Data Tools Group
    b) Forecast Group
    c) Outline Group
    d) Queries & Connection Group
    Answer: b) Forecast Group

32. Which tab contains editing features, comments, track changes, and workbook protection options, ensuring data security?
    a) Data Tab
    b) Review Tab
    c) View Tab
    d) Help Tab
    Answer: b) Review Tab

33. Spell Check and Thesaurus are features of which group under the Review Tab?
    a) Language Group
    b) Comments Group
    c) Proofing Group
    d) Protect Group
    Answer: c) Proofing Group

34. Protect Sheet, Protect Workbook, and Allow Edit Ranges are options in which group under the Review Tab?
    a) Proofing Group
    b) Language Group
    c) Comments Group
    d) Protect Group
    Answer: d) Protect Group

35. Which tab helps change the view of an Excel sheet, making it easy to view data and prepare the workbook for printing?
    a) Data Tab
    b) Review Tab
    c) View Tab
    d) Help Tab
    Answer: c) View Tab

36. Normal, Page Break Preview, Page Layout & Custom View are options in which group under the View Tab?
    a) Zoom Group
    b) Window Group
    c) Workbook Views Group
    d) Macros Group
    Answer: c) Workbook Views Group

37. The Zoom range mentioned for the View Tab in MS Excel is:
    a) 10% to 200%
    b) 10% to 300%
    c) 10% to 400%
    d) 10% to 500%
    Answer: c) 10% to 400%

38. Which tab allows the user to get help by pressing F1 Key?
    a) Review Tab
    b) View Tab
    c) Help Tab
    d) Data Tab
    Answer: c) Help Tab

39. What is an Excel file which contains worksheets of rows and columns?
    a) Worksheet
    b) Cell
    c) Workbook
    d) Spreadsheet
    Answer: c) Workbook

40. In Excel 2016, what is the default number of worksheets in a workbook?
    a) Zero
    b) One
    c) Two
    d) Three
    Answer: b) One

41. What indicates the number of rows (Left of the worksheet) and alphabet of columns (Top of the worksheet)?
    a) Cell Address
    b) Row & Column Headings
    c) Formula Bar
    d) Status Bar
    Answer: b) Row & Column Headings

42. What is the total number of rows in the new version of an Excel sheet?
    a) 65,536
    b) 1,048,576
    c) 16,384
    d) 4,096
    Answer: b) 1,048,576

43. What is the total number of columns in the new version of an Excel sheet?
    a) 256
    b) 1,024
    c) 16,384
    d) 65,536
    Answer: c) 16,384

44. What is a box which is the intersection of a row and column in a worksheet, and is the smallest block of the spreadsheet?
    a) Range
    b) Cell
    c) Block
    d) Area
    Answer: b) Cell

45. The cell in which the user is currently working is known as the:
    a) Selected Cell
    b) Current Cell
    c) Active Cell
    d) Highlighted Cell
    Answer: c) Active Cell

46. What is the location of a cell (e.g., C10) known as?
    a) Cell ID
    b) Cell Name
    c) Cell Address
    d) Cell Pointer
    Answer: c) Cell Address

47. What feature fills the values in the cell according to a given pattern (e.g., Months & Days, Even Numbers)?
    a) Flash Fill
    b) Autofill
    c) AutoSum
    d) AutoCorrect
    Answer: b) Autofill

48. An expression that calculates the value of a cell and always starts with a '=' is called a:
    a) Function
    b) Formula
    c) Macro
    d) Query
    Answer: b) Formula

49. What is located just below the ribbon, shows the contents of the active cell, and allows creating and viewing formulas?
    a) Status Bar
    b) Title Bar
    c) Formula Bar
    d) Quick Access Toolbar
    Answer: c) Formula Bar

50. What is an interactive report creation system used to reorganize and summarize data?
    a) Chart
    b) Pivot Table
    c) Sparkline
    d) Filter
    Answer: b) Pivot Table

51. What feature is used to identify patterns in existing data and copies only required data from one column to another?
    a) Autofill
    b) Flash Fill
    c) AutoSum
    d) Data Validation
    Answer: b) Flash Fill

52. What is used to freeze rows/columns in place, making them visible when scrolling (e.g., header row visible)?
    a) Wrap Text
    b) Freeze Panes
    c) Hide Rows/Columns
    d) Split Window
    Answer: b) Freeze Panes

53. What is a sequence of instructions that replace a repetitive series of keyboard and mouse actions to execute, used in MS Word and MS Excel?
    a) Formula
    b) Function
    c) Macro
    d) Script
    Answer: c) Macro

54. What is the bar below the worksheet names that has a few buttons and indicators?
    a) Formula Bar
    b) Title Bar
    c) Status Bar
    d) Ribbon
    Answer: c) Status Bar

55. When text exceeds a column width/height, what automatically adjusts the height/width of a cell to make all text visible?
    a) Merge & Center
    b) Autofit
    c) Wrap Text
    d) Text to Columns
    Answer: c) Wrap Text

56. What are graphs that can fit into one cell and give information about the data?
    a) Charts
    b) Smart Art Graphics
    c) Sparklines
    d) 3D Models
    Answer: c) Sparklines

57. Which shortcut key is used to edit the active cell in Excel?
    a) F2
    b) F5
    c) F9
    d) F4
    Answer: a) F2

58. Which shortcut key is used to open the Go To Dialog box in Excel?
    a) F2
    b) F5
    c) F9
    d) F4
    Answer: b) F5

59. Which shortcut key is used to calculate worksheets in Excel?
    a) F2
    b) F5
    c) F9
    d) F4
    Answer: c) F9

60. Which shortcut key is used to create an absolute reference in Excel?
    a) F2
    b) F5
    c) F9
    d) F4
    Answer: d) F4

61. Which shortcut key moves the active cell one cell to the right?
    a) Shift + Tab
    b) Tab
    c) Ctrl + Home
    d) Arrow Keys
    Answer: b) Tab

62. Which shortcut key moves the active cell one cell to the left?
    a) Tab
    b) Shift + Tab
    c) Ctrl + Home
    d) Arrow Keys
    Answer: b) Shift + Tab

63. Which shortcut key moves the active cell to the first cell (A1) of the worksheet?
    a) Ctrl + End
    b) Ctrl + Home
    c) Shift + Spacebar
    d) Ctrl + Spacebar
    Answer: b) Ctrl + Home

64. Which shortcut key moves the active cell to the last cell of the worksheet containing data?
    a) Ctrl + Home
    b) Ctrl + End
    c) Shift + Spacebar
    d) Ctrl + Spacebar
    Answer: b) Ctrl + End

65. Which shortcut key is used to select an entire row?
    a) Ctrl + Spacebar
    b) Shift + Spacebar
    c) Ctrl + 9
    d) Ctrl + 0
    Answer: b) Shift + Spacebar

66. Which shortcut key is used to select an entire column?
    a) Shift + Spacebar
    b) Ctrl + Spacebar
    c) Ctrl + 9
    d) Ctrl + 0
    Answer: b) Ctrl + Spacebar

67. Which shortcut key hides selected rows?
    a) Ctrl + 0
    b) Ctrl + 9
    c) Ctrl + Shift + 9
    d) Ctrl + Shift + 0
    Answer: b) Ctrl + 9

68. Which shortcut key hides selected columns?
    a) Ctrl + 9
    b) Ctrl + 0
    c) Ctrl + Shift + 9
    d) Ctrl + Shift + 0
    Answer: b) Ctrl + 0

69. Which shortcut key displays the control menu for the active window?
    a) Alt + Enter
    b) Alt + Spacebar
    c) Ctrl + Shift + Home
    d) F11
    Answer: b) Alt + Spacebar

70. Which shortcut key is used to insert a new worksheet?
    a) Shift + F9
    b) Shift + F11
    c) F11
    d) Ctrl + F11
    Answer: b) Shift + F11

71. Which shortcut key is used to calculate the active worksheet?
    a) F9
    b) Shift + F9
    c) Shift + F11
    d) Ctrl + Shift + ;
    Answer: b) Shift + F9

72. Which shortcut key is used to enter the current time in a cell?
    a) Ctrl + ;
    b) Ctrl + Shift + ;
    c) Ctrl + Shift + @
    d) Ctrl + Shift + #
    Answer: b) Ctrl + Shift + ;

73. Which shortcut key is used to enter the current date in a cell?
    a) Ctrl + Shift + ;
    b) Ctrl + ;
    c) Ctrl + Shift + @
    d) Ctrl + Shift + #
    Answer: b) Ctrl + ;

74. Which shortcut key is used to create a chart based on selected data?
    a) F11
    b) F5
    c) Alt + F1
    d) Ctrl + Shift + U
    Answer: a) F11

75. Which shortcut key is used to expand/collapse the formula bar?
    a) Alt + =
    b) Ctrl + ~
    c) Ctrl + Shift + U
    d) F2
    Answer: c) Ctrl + Shift + U

76. Which shortcut key inserts an AutoSum formula?
    a) Ctrl + ~
    b) Alt + =
    c) Ctrl + Shift + @
    d) Ctrl + Shift + #
    Answer: b) Alt + =

77. Which shortcut key is used to show/hide all formulas in the worksheet?
    a) Alt + =
    b) Ctrl + ~
    c) Ctrl + Shift + U
    d) F2
    Answer: b) Ctrl + ~

78. Which shortcut key applies the time format?
    a) Ctrl + Shift + #
    b) Ctrl + Shift + @
    c) Ctrl + Shift + %
    d) Ctrl + Shift + $
    Answer: b) Ctrl + Shift + @

79. Which shortcut key applies the date format?
    a) Ctrl + Shift + @
    b) Ctrl + Shift + #
    c) Ctrl + Shift + %
    d) Ctrl + Shift + $
    Answer: b) Ctrl + Shift + #

80. Which shortcut key applies the percentage format without decimals?
    a) Ctrl + Shift + @
    b) Ctrl + Shift + #
    c) Ctrl + Shift + %
    d) Ctrl + Shift + $
    Answer: c) Ctrl + Shift + %

81. Which shortcut key applies the currency format with two decimals?
    a) Ctrl + Shift + @
    b) Ctrl + Shift + #
    c) Ctrl + Shift + %
    d) Ctrl + Shift + $
    Answer: d) Ctrl + Shift + $

82. Which shortcut key starts a new line in the same cell?
    a) Ctrl + Enter
    b) Shift + Enter
    c) Alt + Enter
    d) Enter
    Answer: c) Alt + Enter

83. Which shortcut key extends the selection of cells to the first cell of the worksheet?
    a) Alt + Enter
    b) Ctrl + Shift + Home
    c) Ctrl + End
    d) Shift + Spacebar
    Answer: b) Ctrl + Shift + Home

84. Which shortcut key creates a Pivot Chart in the same worksheet?
    a) F11
    b) Alt + F1
    c) F1
    d) Ctrl + F1
    Answer: b) Alt + F1

85. Which of the following menu types is also called a drop-down menu?
    a) Fly-down
    b) Pop-down
    c) Pull-down
    d) Drag-down
    Answer: c) Pull-down

86. Which of the following shortcut keys is used to ‘Find and Replace’ text in a word document?
    a) CTRL + G
    b) CTRL + H
    c) CTRL + I
    d) CTRL + F
    Answer: b) CTRL + H

87. Which of the following is NOT true about hyperlink in MS Word?
    a) Hyperlinks can only be used to create a link for an existing webpage and not to an existing file on your computer.
    b) It can be made using the INSERT Tab in a Word Document.
    c) The shortcut command to create a hyperlink in a word document is CTRL + K.
    d) The option ‘Place in This Document’ is used to refer to a link in the current document.
    Answer: a) Hyperlinks can only be used to create a link for an existing webpage and not to an existing file on your computer.

88. Which of the following is the shortcut key for paste?
    a) Ctrl + A
    b) Ctrl + C
    c) Ctrl + P
    d) Ctrl + V
    Answer: d) Ctrl + V

89. Setting fonts for the text in your document is an example of:
    a) Reviewing
    b) Designing
    c) Inserting
    d) Formatting
    Answer: d) Formatting

90. Copy and X Copy are same in the sense:
    a) Both can be used to copy file or group of files
    b) Both are external commands of windows
    c) Both are internal command of DOS
    d) Both are commands of Apple OS
    Answer: a) Both can be used to copy file or group of files

91. Which of the following are valid minimum & maximum zoom sizes in MS Word?
    a) 20, 600
    b) 30, 300
    c) 100, 400
    d) 10, 500
    Answer: d) 10, 500

92. Which of the following is displayed by MS Excel when the column is not big enough to display the information?
    a) $$$$
    b) ####
    c) &&&&
    d) 
    Answer: b) ####

93. What is a popular presentation program used to create slideshows comprising text, graphics, sounds, and other animated media?
    a) Microsoft Word
    b) Microsoft Excel
    c) Microsoft PowerPoint
    d) Microsoft Access
    Answer: c) Microsoft PowerPoint

94. What is the file extension of MS PowerPoint presentations?
    a) .doc
    b) .xls
    c) .ppt
    d) .txt
    Answer: c) .ppt

95. The Home Tab in MS PowerPoint includes commands for:
    a) Inserting tables
    b) Designing slides
    c) Formatting presentations
    d) Adding transitions
    Answer: c) Formatting presentations

96. What is the maximum font size available in the dropdown selection for Font Group in MS PowerPoint's Home Tab?
    a) 72
    b) 96
    c) 120
    d) Unlimited
    Answer: b) 96

97. Shapes, Arrange, Quick Styles, Shape Fill, Shape Outline, and Shape Effects are part of which group under the Home Tab in MS PowerPoint?
    a) Clipboard Group
    b) Slides Group
    c) Drawing Group
    d) Paragraph Group
    Answer: c) Drawing Group

98. Which tab in MS PowerPoint is used to add features such as tables, pictures, clip art, charts, and headers/footers into a presentation?
    a) Home Tab
    b) Design Tab
    c) Insert Tab
    d) Animation Tab
    Answer: c) Insert Tab

99. Video, Audio, and Screen Recording are options available in which group under the Insert Tab in MS PowerPoint?
    a) Images Group
    b) Illustrations Group
    c) Text Group
    d) Media Group
    Answer: d) Media Group

100. The Design tab in MS PowerPoint holds commands related to the presence of slides, such as:
    a) Transitions
    b) Animation order
    c) Page setup and slide orientation
    d) Proofing
    Answer: c) Page setup and slide orientation

101. Themes Group, Variants Group, and Customize Group are found under which tab in MS PowerPoint?
    a) Home Tab
    b) Insert Tab
    c) Design Tab
    d) Transition Tab
    Answer: c) Design Tab

102. Which tab in MS PowerPoint is used to add transitions to a slide and to customize transition effects?
    a) Design Tab
    b) Transition Tab
    c) Animation Tab
    d) Slideshow Tab
    Answer: b) Transition Tab

103. Sound in slides, Duration, Apply to all slides, and Advance slide are options within which group under the Transition Tab?
    a) Preview
    b) Transition to this slide
    c) Timing Group
    d) Effect options
    Answer: c) Timing Group

104. Which tab in MS PowerPoint is used to add animation to text in a slide and to manage the animation order?
    a) Transition Tab
    b) Animation Tab
    c) Slideshow Tab
    d) Review Tab
    Answer: b) Animation Tab

105. Add Animation, Animation Pane, and Trigger are features of which group under the Animation Tab?
    a) Preview Group
    b) Animation Group
    c) Advanced Animation
    d) Timing Group
    Answer: c) Advanced Animation

106. Which tab in MS PowerPoint is used to finalize the slideshow details, timings, and more?
    a) Animation Tab
    b) Slideshow Tab
    c) Review Tab
    d) View Tab
    Answer: b) Slideshow Tab

107. From Beginning, From Current Slide, Present Online, and Custom Slideshow are options found in which group under the Slideshow Tab?
    a) Set up Group
    b) Monitors Group
    c) Start Slide Show Group
    d) Record Slide Show
    Answer: c) Start Slide Show Group

108. Which tab in MS PowerPoint is used to check spelling, collaborate by adding comments, and access editor tools?
    a) Slideshow Tab
    b) Review Tab
    c) View Tab
    d) Help Tab
    Answer: b) Review Tab

109. Spelling and Thesaurus are features of which group under the Review Tab in MS PowerPoint?
    a) Language Group
    b) Comments Group
    c) Proofing Group
    d) Compare Group
    Answer: c) Proofing Group

110. Which tab in MS PowerPoint is used to access various presentation views (Normal, Outline view, Slide Sorter) and to show/hide the ruler and grid lines?
    a) Review Tab
    b) View Tab
    c) Help Tab
    d) Design Tab
    Answer: b) View Tab

111. Normal, Outline view, Slide Sorter, Notes Page, and Reading view are options in which group under the View Tab in MS PowerPoint?
    a) Masters View Group
    b) Show Group
    c) Presentation Views Group
    d) Zoom Group
    Answer: c) Presentation Views Group

112. Slide Master, Handout Master, and Notes Master are options within which group under the View Tab?
    a) Presentation Views Group
    b) Masters View Group
    c) Show Group
    d) Window Group
    Answer: b) Masters View Group

113. What is a collection of individual slides that contain information on a topic with audio, visual features, and makes an interaction between a speaker and an audience?
    a) Document
    b) Spreadsheet
    c) Presentation
    d) Database
    Answer: c) Presentation

114. What is a pattern of a slide whose format and color scheme is used as the basis for other presentations?
    a) Master Slide
    b) Design Template
    c) Layout
    d) Theme
    Answer: b) Design Template

115. What is a slide that controls the properties such as theme, layout, background, color, fonts, and positioning of all other slides in a presentation?
    a) Design Template
    b) Normal Slide
    c) Master Slide
    d) Custom Slide
    Answer: c) Master Slide

116. Which view is used for creating, editing, and viewing presentation slides, containing Slides, Outline, and Notes panes?
    a) Slide Sorter View
    b) Reading View
    c) Normal View
    d) Notes Page View
    Answer: c) Normal View

117. What is a variety of shades of grey (Black and white combination) without apparent color?
    a) Monochrome
    b) Grayscale
    c) Sepia
    d) Duotone
    Answer: b) Grayscale

118. What is used to add notes and graphics that apply to the current slide in the presentation, and can also be used to print the notes?
    a) Slides Pane
    b) Outline Pane
    c) Notes Pane
    d) Task Pane
    Answer: c) Notes Pane

119. Which pane displays the slide thumbnails and allows the user to view and edit the slides?
    a) Notes Pane
    b) Outline Pane
    c) Slides Pane
    d) Task Pane
    Answer: c) Slides Pane

120. Which pane displays the text from the slides?
    a) Slides Pane
    b) Notes Pane
    c) Outline Pane
    d) Task Pane
    Answer: c) Outline Pane

121. What is used to display the presentation and is the way to preview the presentation?
    a) Normal View
    b) Slide Sorter View
    c) Slide Show View
    d) Reading View
    Answer: c) Slide Show View

122. Which view shows all the slides in a presentation as thumbnails and is used to reorganize, insert, delete, and copy the presentation slides?
    a) Normal View
    b) Slide Show View
    c) Slide Sorter View
    d) Notes Page View
    Answer: c) Slide Sorter View

123. What is the time period that a slide appears on the screen?
    a) Slide Duration
    b) Slide Delay
    c) Slide Timing
    d) Animation Timing
    Answer: c) Slide Timing

124. What allows access to commands like getting started, PowerPoint help, slide, new presentation etc. related to a specific task?
    a) Ribbon
    b) Task Pane
    c) Status Bar
    d) Quick Access Toolbar
    Answer: b) Task Pane

125. What is a wizard that helps to create a presentation by providing a general structure and suggested topics based on the user’s view regarding the presentation output?
    a) Design Template
    b) Master Slide
    c) AutoContent Wizard
    d) Presentation Builder
    Answer: c) AutoContent Wizard

126. Which shortcut key changes the zoom level in PowerPoint?
    a) Alt + H, F and S
    b) Alt + N, X
    c) Alt + W, Q
    d) Alt + F10
    Answer: c) Alt + W, Q

127. Which shortcut key is used to change the font size in PowerPoint?
    a) Alt + H, F and S
    b) Alt + N, X
    c) Alt + W, Q
    d) Alt + G, H
    Answer: a) Alt + H, F and S

128. Which shortcut key is used to insert a shape in PowerPoint?
    a) Alt + H, F and S
    b) Alt + H, S and H
    c) Alt + G, H
    d) Alt + N, P
    Answer: b) Alt + H, S and H

129. Which shortcut key is used to select a theme in PowerPoint?
    a) Alt + G, H
    b) Alt + H, L
    c) Alt + N, P
    d) Alt + N, X
    Answer: a) Alt + G, H

130. Which shortcut key is used to select a slide layout in PowerPoint?
    a) Alt + G, H
    b) Alt + H, L
    c) Alt + N, P
    d) Alt + N, X
    Answer: b) Alt + H, L

131. Which shortcut key is used to insert a picture in PowerPoint?
    a) Alt + H, S and H
    b) Alt + G, H
    c) Alt + N, P
    d) Alt + N, X
    Answer: c) Alt + N, P

132. Which shortcut key is used to access the Home Tab in PowerPoint?
    a) Alt + N
    b) Alt + S, B
    c) Alt + H
    d) Alt + F, X
    Answer: c) Alt + H

133. Which shortcut key is used to access the Insert Tab in PowerPoint?
    a) Alt + H
    b) Alt + N
    c) Alt + S, B
    d) Alt + F, X
    Answer: b) Alt + N

134. Which shortcut key is used to start a slideshow in PowerPoint?
    a) Alt + H
    b) Alt + N
    c) Alt + S, B
    d) F5
    Answer: c) Alt + S, B

135. Which shortcut key is used to close PowerPoint?
    a) Alt + S, B
    b) Alt + F, X
    c) F5
    d) Esc
    Answer: b) Alt + F, X

136. Which key is used to end a slideshow in PowerPoint?
    a) F5
    b) Alt + Q
    c) Esc
    d) Alt + F4
    Answer: c) Esc

137. Which shortcut key is used to insert a textbox in PowerPoint?
    a) Alt + N, P
    b) Alt + N, X
    c) Alt + N, W
    d) Alt + F10
    Answer: b) Alt + N, X

138. Which shortcut key is used to insert WordArt in PowerPoint?
    a) Alt + N, X
    b) Alt + N, W
    c) Alt + F10
    d) Ctrl + D
    Answer: b) Alt + N, W

139. Which shortcut key is used to maximize the window in PowerPoint?
    a) Alt + F10
    b) Ctrl + D
    c) Ctrl + Shift + F
    d) Shift + F3
    Answer: a) Alt + F10

140. Which shortcut key is used to duplicate a slide in PowerPoint?
    a) Alt + F10
    b) Ctrl + D
    c) Ctrl + Shift + F
    d) Shift + F3
    Answer: b) Ctrl + D

141. Which shortcut key is used to change the font style in PowerPoint?
    a) Ctrl + D
    b) Ctrl + Shift + F
    c) Shift + F3
    d) Ctrl + Shift + Z
    Answer: b) Ctrl + Shift + F

142. Which shortcut key is used to toggle cases (e.g., lowercase to uppercase) in PowerPoint?
    a) Ctrl + Shift + F
    b) Shift + F3
    c) Ctrl + Shift + Z
    d) Shift + F6
    Answer: b) Shift + F3

143. Which shortcut key converts text to Normal/Plain Text in PowerPoint?
    a) Shift + F3
    b) Ctrl + Shift + Z
    c) Shift + F6
    d) Shift + F10
    Answer: b) Ctrl + Shift + Z

144. Which shortcut key moves anticlockwise among panes in PowerPoint?
    a) Ctrl + Shift + Z
    b) Shift + F6
    c) Shift + F10
    d) Ctrl + F5
    Answer: b) Shift + F6

145. Which shortcut key displays a context menu in PowerPoint?
    a) Shift + F6
    b) Shift + F10
    c) Ctrl + F5
    d) Alt + Q
    Answer: b) Shift + F10

146. Which shortcut key restores the window to its previous size in PowerPoint?
    a) Shift + F10
    b) Ctrl + F5
    c) Alt + Q
    d) Alt + T
    Answer: b) Ctrl + F5

147. Which shortcut key is used for searching in PowerPoint?
    a) Alt + T
    b) Alt + A
    c) Alt + Q
    d) Alt + R
    Answer: c) Alt + Q

148. Which shortcut key accesses the Transitions Tab in PowerPoint?
    a) Alt + T
    b) Alt + A
    c) Alt + R
    d) Alt + G
    Answer: a) Alt + T

149. Which shortcut key accesses the Animations Tab in PowerPoint?
    a) Alt + T
    b) Alt + A
    c) Alt + R
    d) Alt + G
    Answer: b) Alt + A

150. Which shortcut key accesses the Design Tab in PowerPoint?
    a) Alt + A
    b) Alt + G
    c) Alt + W
    d) Alt + R
    Answer: b) Alt + G

151. Which shortcut key accesses the Review Tab in PowerPoint?
    a) Alt + A
    b) Alt + G
    c) Alt + R
    d) Alt + W
    Answer: c) Alt + R

152. Which shortcut key accesses the View Tab in PowerPoint?
    a) Alt + G
    b) Alt + R
    c) Alt + W
    d) Alt + T
    Answer: c) Alt + W

153. A file extension is a suffix at the end of a filename that specifies:
    a) The file's creation date
    b) The file's size
    c) What type of file it is
    d) The file's author
    Answer: c) What type of file it is

154. What is the purpose of a file extension for the operating system?
    a) To manage security permissions
    b) To understand the characteristics of the file
    c) To determine the file's modification time
    d) To compress the file
    Answer: b) To understand the characteristics of the file

155. What does the file extension '.apk' stand for?
    a) Adobe Portable Key
    b) Android Package file
    c) Apple Private Key
    d) Archive Program Kit
    Answer: b) Android Package file

156. What does the file extension '.bin' signify?
    a) Binary file
    b) Backup input file
    c) Business information file
    d) Basic instruction file
    Answer: a) Binary file

157. What type of file has a '.txt' extension?
    a) Temporary file
    b) Text markup file
    c) Plain text file
    d) Translated text file
    Answer: c) Plain text file

158. What does the file extension '.py' represent?
    a) Pascal file
    b) Perl file
    c) Python file
    d) PHP file
    Answer: c) Python file

159. What do '.wks' or '.wps' file extensions indicate?
    a) Windows System file
    b) Web Script file
    c) Microsoft Works Word Processor Document file
    d) WordPad Spreadsheet file
    Answer: c) Microsoft Works Word Processor Document file

160. What does the file extension '.wsf' stand for?
    a) Web Standard Format
    b) Windows Script file
    c) Wireless Secure File
    d) Word Sheet Format
    Answer: b) Windows Script file

161. What does the file extension '.ods' denote?
    a) Oracle Data Source
    b) OpenDocument Spreadsheet
    c) OpenOffice Calc spreadsheet file
    d) Online Database System
    Answer: c) OpenOffice Calc spreadsheet file

162. What does the file extension '.exe' indicate?
    a) Example file
    b) Executable file
    c) Extraction file
    d) Export file
    Answer: b) Executable file

163. What type of file is '.xlr'?
    a) XML Report file
    b) Excel Report file
    c) Microsoft Works spreadsheet file
    d) X-Large Record file
    Answer: c) Microsoft Works spreadsheet file

164. What does the file extension '.com' represent?
    a) Communication file
    b) Compressed file
    c) MS-DOS command file
    d) Common file
    Answer: c) MS-DOS command file

165. What does the file extension '.xlsx' indicate?
    a) Microsoft Excel File (old format)
    b) MS Excel Open XML spreadsheet file
    c) Excel Macro-enabled file
    d) Excel Template file
    Answer: b) MS Excel Open XML spreadsheet file

166. What does the file extension '.mp3' denote?
    a) MPEG-4 video file
    b) Music Program file
    c) MP3 audio file
    d) Multimedia Presentation file
    Answer: c) MP3 audio file

167. What does the file extension '.pptx' represent?
    a) PowerPoint presentation (old format)
    b) PowerPoint Open XML presentation
    c) PowerPoint Template file
    d) Photoshop Project file
    Answer: b) PowerPoint Open XML presentation

168. What does the file extension '.wma' stand for?
    a) Web Media Audio file
    b) Windows Media Audio file
    c) Wireless Music Archive
    d) Windows Mobile Application
    Answer: b) Windows Media Audio file

169. What do '.db' or '.dbf' file extensions indicate?
    a) Debugging file
    b) Device driver file
    c) Database file
    d) Downloadable binary file
    Answer: c) Database file

170. What does the file extension '.wpl' stand for?
    a) Web Page Layout
    b) Windows Phone Log
    c) Windows Media Player Playlist
    d) Word Processing Layout
    Answer: c) Windows Media Player Playlist

171. What does the file extension '.sql' represent?
    a) System Query Language file
    b) SQL Database file
    c) Standard Query Log
    d) Security Query List
    Answer: b) SQL Database file

172. What do '.mpg' or '.mpeg' file extensions indicate?
    a) Microsoft Picture Graphics file
    b) Mobile Phone Gallery file
    c) Multimedia Performance Group file
    d) MPEG Video file
    Answer: d) MPEG Video file

173. What does the file extension '.tar' signify?
    a) Temporary Archive file
    b) Text Archive Resource
    c) Linux / Unix tarball file archive
    d) Transfer All Records
    Answer: c) Linux / Unix tarball file archive

174. What does the file extension '.avi' stand for?
    a) Audio Visual Interface
    b) Audio Video Interleave file
    c) Advanced Video Index
    d) Animated Visual Image
    Answer: b) Audio Video Interleave file

175. What does the file extension '.bak' denote?
    a) Batch Access Key
    b) Basic Archive Kit
    c) Backup file
    d) Block Access File
    Answer: c) Backup file

176. What does the file extension '.flv' represent?
    a) Fast Loading Video
    b) Flash Live Video
    c) Adobe Flash video file
    d) Full Length Video
    Answer: c) Adobe Flash video file

177. What does the file extension '.tmp' signify?
    a) Template file
    b) Temporary file
    c) Time-series file
    d) Transfer Markup Protocol
    Answer: b) Temporary file

178. What does the file extension '.mp4' stand for?
    a) Mobile Phone 4 file
    b) Multimedia Package 4
    c) MPEG-4 video file
    d) Motion Picture 4 file
    Answer: c) MPEG-4 video file

179. What do '.htm' or '.html' file extensions indicate?
    a) Hyperlink Text Markup
    b) Hidden Text Markup Language
    c) HTML/Hypertext Markup Language file
    d) Home Page Text Markup
    Answer: c) HTML/Hypertext Markup Language file

180. What does the file extension '.odt' represent?
    a) Open Database Table file
    b) Open Document Text file
    c) Open office writer doc file
    d) Online Data Transfer file
    Answer: c) Open office writer doc file

181. What does the file extension '.png' stand for?
    a) Personal Network Graphics
    b) Portable Network Graphic image
    c) Photo Negative Graphic
    d) Printer Native Graphics
    Answer: b) Portable Network Graphic image

182. What does the file extension '.pdf' denote?
    a) Personal Document File
    b) Portable Document Format
    c) PDF file
    d) Print Document File
    Answer: c) PDF file

183. What does the file extension '.gif' represent?
    a) General Image Format
    b) Graphical Interchange Format image
    c) Graphics Interface File
    d) Grouped Image File
    Answer: b) Graphical Interchange Format image

184. What does the file extension '.js' stand for?
    a) Java System file
    b) JScript file
    c) JavaScript file
    d) Joint Script file
    Answer: c) JavaScript file

185. What does the file extension '.psd' indicate?
    a) PostScript Document file
    b) Photoshop Document
    c) Adobe Photoshop Document image
    d) Portable System Document
    Answer: c) Adobe Photoshop Document image

186. What does the file extension '.php' represent?
    a) Personal Home Page file
    b) Preprocessed Hypertext Page
    c) PHP Source file code
    d) Program Helper Page
    Answer: c) PHP Source file code

187. What do '.jpg' or '.jpeg' file extensions indicate?
    a) Joint Picture Group image
    b) JPEG image
    c) Java Picture Graphics
    d) Joint Photographic Expert Graphics
    Answer: b) JPEG image

188. What does the file extension '.ps' stand for?
    a) Photoshop Script
    b) Printer Script
    c) PostScript file
    d) Program Source
    Answer: c) PostScript file

189. What does the file extension '.sys' represent?
    a) System Log file
    b) Synchronization file
    c) Windows system file
    d) Setup Information System
    Answer: c) Windows system file

190. What does the file extension '.max' denote?
    a) Maximum file size
    b) 3ds Max Scene File
    c) Maximize window file
    d) Macro execution file
    Answer: b) 3ds Max Scene File

191. What does the file extension '.jsp' stand for?
    a) JavaScript Page
    b) Java Source Page
    c) Java Server Page file
    d) Joint Script Program
    Answer: c) Java Server Page file

192. What does the file extension '.cfg' indicate?
    a) Command File Group
    b) Configuration file
    c) Cache File Group
    d) Control Flow Graph
    Answer: b) Configuration file



MS ACCESS

1.  Which of the following is the primary purpose of Microsoft Access?
    a) Word processing
    b) Spreadsheet calculations
    c) Database management
    d) Presentation creation
    Answer: c) Database management

2.  What type of database is MS Access primarily known for?
    a) Hierarchical database
    b) Network database
    c) Relational database
    d) Object-oriented database
    Answer: c) Relational database

3.  Which file extension is typically associated with an MS Access database file (newer versions)?
    a) .doc
    b) .xls
    c) .accdb
    d) .pptx
    Answer: c) .accdb

4.  Which file extension is associated with older MS Access database files (Access 2003 and earlier)?
    a) .mdb
    b) .accdb
    c) .adp
    d) .mde
    Answer: a) .mdb

5.  How can you open an existing MS Access database file?
    a) Double-clicking the .accdb file
    b) Opening MS Access and then selecting "Open" from the File menu
    c) Both a and b
    d) Only by importing data from another program
    Answer: c) Both a and b

6.  When you open MS Access, what is the default view for a new database?
    a) Datasheet View
    b) Design View
    c) Layout View
    d) Print Preview
    Answer: a) Datasheet View

Category 2: Creating a Database & Tables

7.  What is the first step you typically take when creating a new, blank database in MS Access?
    a) Create a form
    b) Create a report
    c) Create a table
    d) Define relationships
    Answer: c) Create a table

8.  In MS Access, what is the fundamental building block for storing data?
    a) Query
    b) Form
    c) Table
    d) Report
    Answer: c) Table

9.  Which view allows you to define the fields, data types, and properties of a table?
    a) Datasheet View
    b) Layout View
    c) Design View
    d) Print Preview
    Answer: c) Design View

10. What is a "field" in an MS Access table?
    a) A complete record
    b) A single piece of information for each record
    c) A collection of tables
    d) A set of related forms
    Answer: b) A single piece of information for each record

11. Which of the following is a suitable data type for storing a person's name?
    a) Number
    b) Date/Time
    c) Short Text
    d) Yes/No
    Answer: c) Short Text

12. Which data type would you use for storing a unique identifier that automatically increments?
    a) Number
    b) AutoNumber
    c) Memo (Long Text)
    d) Currency
    Answer: b) AutoNumber

13. What is the purpose of a Primary Key in an Access table?
    a) To sort records alphabetically
    b) To uniquely identify each record in a table
    c) To create relationships between unrelated tables
    d) To display data in a form
    Answer: b) To uniquely identify each record in a table

14. How do you set a Primary Key in Design View for a table?
    a) Right-click the field and select "Primary Key"
    b) Select the field and click the "Primary Key" button in the Design tab
    c) Both a and b
    d) Primary Keys are set automatically
    Answer: c) Both a and b

15. Which of the following data types would you use to store a large amount of descriptive text?
    a) Short Text
    b) Long Text (Memo)
    c) Number
    d) Hyperlink
    Answer: b) Long Text (Memo)

16. To ensure that a field always contains a value, which field property would you set to "Yes"?
    a) Indexed
    b) Required
    c) Valid Rule
    d) Default Value
    Answer: b) Required

Category 3: Managing Data in Tables

17. Which view allows you to enter, edit, and delete records in a table?
    a) Design View
    b) Datasheet View
    c) Layout View
    d) Print Preview
    Answer: b) Datasheet View

18. How do you add a new record to a table in Datasheet View?
    a) Press the Delete key
    b) Click the "New (blank) record" button in the Navigation Pane
    c) Type directly into the last empty row
    d) Both b and c
    Answer: d) Both b and c

19. To sort records in ascending order by a specific field in Datasheet View, you would:
    a) Drag and drop the field to a new position
    b) Right-click the field header and select "Sort A to Z"
    c) Use the "Find" command
    d) Change the data type
    Answer: b) Right-click the field header and select "Sort A to Z"

20. What is the purpose of filtering data in a table?
    a) To permanently delete unwanted records
    b) To temporarily hide records that do not meet specified criteria
    c) To change the data type of a field
    d) To create a new table
    Answer: b) To temporarily hide records that do not meet specified criteria

21. To search for specific data within a table, which feature would you typically use?
    a) Sort
    b) Filter
    c) Find
    d) Group
    Answer: c) Find

Category 4: Relationships & Queries

22. What is the purpose of establishing relationships between tables in MS Access?
    a) To avoid data redundancy and ensure data integrity
    b) To make forms look more appealing
    c) To speed up data entry for individual records
    d) To generate complex reports automatically
    Answer: a) To avoid data redundancy and ensure data integrity

23. Which type of relationship is most common between two tables where one record in the first table can be associated with many records in the second table?
    a) One-to-one
    b) One-to-many
    c) Many-to-many
    d) Self-referencing
    Answer: b) One-to-many

24. Which field is used to link two tables in a one-to-many relationship?
    a) Primary Key in the "one" table and Foreign Key in the "many" table
    b) Primary Key in both tables
    c) Any field with the same name
    d) A calculated field
    Answer: a) Primary Key in the "one" table and Foreign Key in the "many" table

25. What is a "Query" in MS Access?
    a) An object used to enter or display data in a user-friendly format
    b) An object used to extract and display specific data from one or more tables
    c) An object used to print data in a formatted way
    d) An object used to automate tasks
    Answer: b) An object used to extract and display specific data from one or more tables

26. Which view is primarily used to design and specify the criteria for a query?
    a) Datasheet View
    b) SQL View
    c) Design View
    d) Print Preview
    Answer: c) Design View

27. To retrieve records where a specific field is empty, which criterion would you use in a query?
    a) `Is Null`
    b) `Is Not Null`
    c) `=""`
    d) `0`
    Answer: a) `Is Null`

28. To combine criteria in a query where both conditions must be true, you would use which logical operator?
    a) OR
    b) NOT
    c) AND
    d) LIKE
    Answer: c) AND

29. What type of query is used to add new records to an existing table from another table?
    a) Select Query
    b) Delete Query
    c) Append Query
    d) Update Query
    Answer: c) Append Query

Category 5: Forms & Reports

30. What is the primary purpose of a "Form" in MS Access?
    a) To analyze data trends
    b) To provide a user-friendly interface for entering, editing, and viewing data
    c) To print summarized information
    d) To establish relationships between tables
    Answer: b) To provide a user-friendly interface for entering, editing, and viewing data

31. Which view allows you to modify the layout and design of a form, including adding controls and labels?
    a) Form View
    b) Datasheet View
    c) Design View
    d) Layout View
    Answer: c) Design View

32. What is a "Report" in MS Access?
    a) A tool for data entry
    b) An object used to display, summarize, and print data in a professional, organized format
    c) A way to link tables
    d) A method for running SQL commands
    Answer: b) An object used to display, summarize, and print data in a professional, organized format

33. To group data and calculate totals or averages in a report, which Access feature would you use?
    a) Conditional Formatting
    b) Grouping and Sorting
    c) Filtering
    d) Find and Replace
    Answer: b) Grouping and Sorting

34. Which view allows you to see how a report will look when printed, including page breaks?
    a) Report View
    b) Layout View
    c) Design View
    d) Print Preview
    Answer: d) Print Preview

Category 6: Advanced & General Management

35. What is "Referential Integrity" in MS Access?
    a) A feature that prevents users from deleting the database file
    b) A set of rules that Access uses to ensure that relationships between records in related tables are valid
    c) A method for encrypting the database
    d) A way to automatically back up the database
    Answer: b) A set of rules that Access uses to ensure that relationships between records in related tables are valid

36. Which action would violate referential integrity?
    a) Deleting a record from the "one" side of a one-to-many relationship when there are related records in the "many" side, without Cascade Delete enabled.
    b) Adding a new record to a table.
    c) Changing the data type of a field in a single table.
    d) Running a select query.
    Answer: a) Deleting a record from the "one" side of a one-to-many relationship when there are related records in the "many" side, without Cascade Delete enabled.

37. To prevent unauthorized access to your database, you can:
    a) Share the file on a network drive
    b) Set a database password
    c) Delete all data
    d) Rename the file
    Answer: b) Set a database password

38. Which utility helps to compact and repair an Access database, potentially reducing its file size and fixing minor corruption?
    a) Database Tools > Compact and Repair Database
    b) File > Save As
    c) External Data > Import
    d) Home > Find
    Answer: a) Database Tools > Compact and Repair Database

39. What is the purpose of backing up an MS Access database?
    a) To make it run faster
    b) To create an exact copy of the database at a specific point in time to prevent data loss
    c) To share it with multiple users simultaneously
    d) To analyze historical data
    Answer: b) To create an exact copy of the database at a specific point in time to prevent data loss

40. Where can you typically find the options to import data from other sources (like Excel, Text files) into an Access database?
    a) Home tab
    b) Create tab
    c) External Data tab
    d) Database Tools tab
    Answer: c) External Data tab



NETWORK

1.  What is a telecommunications network that allows computers to exchange data using a data link?
    a) Standalone Computer
    b) Computer Network
    c) Data Server
    d) Peripheral Device
    Answer: b) Computer Network

2.  What are computers on networks commonly called?
    a) Hosts
    b) Clients
    c) Servers
    d) Nodes
    Answer: d) Nodes

3.  Who are known as the fathers of the Internet?
    a) Bill Gates and Paul Allen
    b) Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak
    c) Vint Cerf and Bob Kahn
    d) Tim Berners-Lee and Robert Cailliau
    Answer: c) Vint Cerf and Bob Kahn

4.  Which of the following is NOT one of the five components of a computer network mentioned?
    a) Sender
    b) Sender Equipment
    c) Storage Device
    d) Communication Channel
    Answer: c) Storage Device

5.  What is a device that sends a message, which can consist of text, numbers, pictures, etc.? It is also called a source or transmitter.
    a) Receiver
    b) Decoder
    c) Sender
    d) Communication Channel
    Answer: c) Sender

6.  What is a device that converts digital signals into a form that can pass through a transmission medium?
    a) Receiver
    b) Decoder
    c) Encoder
    d) Communication Channel
    Answer: c) Encoder

7.  What is the physical path that connects the sender and the receiver, used to transmit data, and also called a Medium?
    a) Sender Equipment
    b) Receiver Equipment
    c) Communication Channel
    d) Data Link
    Answer: c) Communication Channel

8.  Which of the following is an example of a communication channel?
    a) Copper wire
    b) Fiber optic cable
    c) Microwaves
    d) All of the above
    Answer: d) All of the above

9.  What is a device that converts encoded signals into digital form, which the receiver can understand?
    a) Encoder
    b) Decoder
    c) Modem
    d) Router
    Answer: b) Decoder

10. What is a device that receives the message and must be capable of accepting it? It is also called a sink.
    a) Sender
    b) Receiver
    c) Encoder
    d) Communication Channel
    Answer: b) Receiver

11. Based on area coverage, how many types of computer networks are primarily mentioned?
    a) Two
    b) Three
    c) Four
    d) Five
    Answer: b) Three

12. Which type of computer network covers a small geographical area and is privately owned?
    a) MAN
    b) WAN
    c) LAN
    d) CAN
    Answer: c) LAN

13. What is the typical communication medium used for LANs?
    a) Satellite links
    b) Telephone lines
    c) Twisted pair cables and coaxial cables
    d) Radio waves
    Answer: c) Twisted pair cables and coaxial cables

14. What is the typical high-speed communication data rate offered by LANs?
    a) Up to 10 Mbps
    b) Up to 100 Mbps
    c) Up to 1000 Mbps
    d) Up to 10000 Mbps
    Answer: c) Up to 1000 Mbps

15. Which type of network has higher fault tolerance and less congestion?
    a) MAN
    b) WAN
    c) LAN
    d) CAN
    Answer: c) LAN

16. Which type of computer network covers a larger geographical area than LAN and is often owned by large organizations to interconnect branches across a city?
    a) LAN
    b) WAN
    c) MAN
    d) PAN
    Answer: c) MAN

17. Which type of network has less fault tolerance and more congestion?
    a) LAN
    b) WAN
    c) MAN
    d) WLAN
    Answer: c) MAN

18. What are commonly used as transmission devices in a MAN?
    a) Hubs and Switches
    b) Modems and Wire/Cable
    c) Routers and Bridges
    d) Repeaters and Gateways
    Answer: b) Modems and Wire/Cable

19. Which type of network may serve as an Internet Service Provider (ISP)?
    a) LAN
    b) MAN
    c) WAN
    d) PAN
    Answer: b) MAN

20. Which type of computer network covers a large geographical area and might be restricted within the bounds of a state or country, often connecting LANs through telephone lines and radio waves?
    a) LAN
    b) MAN
    c) WAN
    d) CAN
    Answer: c) WAN

21. The speed of a WAN typically ranges from:
    a) A few Mbps to hundreds of Mbps
    b) A few Gbps to tens of Gbps
    c) A few Kbps to Mbps
    d) Hundreds of Kbps to Gbps
    Answer: c) A few Kbps to Mbps

22. Which of the following is typically constructed by WAN?
    a) Public packet networks
    b) Large corporate networks
    c) Military networks
    d) All of the above
    Answer: d) All of the above

23. What is a wireless network communication covering short distances, using high-frequency radio waves and often including an access point to the Internet? It is also called LAWN.
    a) MAN
    b) WLAN
    c) WPAN
    d) SAN
    Answer: b) WLAN

24. What is a high-speed special-purpose network that supports data storage, retrieval, and sharing, and uses Fibre Channel interconnection technology?
    a) LAN
    b) MAN
    c) WAN
    d) SAN
    Answer: d) SAN

25. What is a computer network of interconnected local area networks, larger than a LAN but smaller than MAN or WAN? It can also stand for Corporate Area Network.
    a) PAN
    b) WLAN
    c) CAN
    d) SAN
    Answer: c) CAN

26. MIT’s Project Athena is given as an example of which type of network?
    a) LAN
    b) MAN
    c) WAN
    d) CAN
    Answer: d) CAN

27. Which type of network refers to the interconnection of telecommunications devices or gadgets around an individual person, covering a range of approximately 10m?
    a) WLAN
    b) WPAN
    c) PAN
    d) CAN
    Answer: c) PAN

28. Which type of personal area network uses wireless communication to transfer data between connected devices of the user, and is also known as a short wireless distance network?
    a) PAN
    b) WPAN
    c) WLAN
    d) SAN
    Answer: b) WPAN

29. What is the physical and logical design that denotes the software, hardware, protocols, and transmission media of data in a network?
    a) Network Topology
    b) Network Protocol
    c) Network Architecture
    d) Network Device
    Answer: c) Network Architecture

30. What are the two types of widely used network architecture mentioned?
    a) Bus and Ring
    b) Star and Mesh
    c) Peer-to-Peer (P2P) and Client/Server
    d) Wired and Wireless
    Answer: c) Peer-to-Peer (P2P) and Client/Server

31. In which network architecture are tasks allocated to all devices, with no hierarchy, and all computers considered equal? It is also known as a distributed architecture.
    a) Client/Server Architecture
    b) Peer-to-Peer Architecture
    c) Hybrid Architecture
    d) Centralized Architecture
    Answer: b) Peer-to-Peer Architecture

32. Peer-to-peer architecture is mostly used for:
    a) Centralized data storage
    b) High-security transactions
    c) File sharing
    d) Server management
    Answer: c) File sharing

33. In which network architecture does the server act as a hub, managing and providing resources to clients that request them?
    a) Peer-to-Peer Architecture
    b) Client/Server Architecture
    c) Distributed Architecture
    d) Decentralized Architecture
    Answer: b) Client/Server Architecture

34. What is a set of guidelines for exchanging data over a computer network?
    a) Topology
    b) Architecture
    c) Protocol
    d) Standard
    Answer: c) Protocol

35. What is the most widely used LAN technology that defines wiring and signaling standards for the physical layer of TCP/IP, standardized as IEEE 802.3?
    a) Token Ring
    b) FDDI
    c) Ethernet
    d) Wi-Fi
    Answer: c) Ethernet

36. What is a local area network topology where nodes are arranged in a closed loop, and data passes between nodes using a token to prevent congestion? It was standardized as IEEE 802.5.
    a) Bus Topology
    b) Star Topology
    c) Ring Topology
    d) Mesh Topology
    Answer: c) Token Ring

37. What is an optical data communication standard used for long-distance networks, providing communication with fiber optic lines and based on the token ring protocol?
    a) Ethernet
    b) Wi-Fi
    c) FDDI
    d) ATM
    Answer: c) FDDI

38. What is the arrangement of a network, its nodes, and connecting lines?
    a) Network Architecture
    b) Network Protocol
    c) Network Topology
    d) Network Device
    Answer: c) Network Topology

39. What are the two types of network topology mentioned?
    a) Wired and Wireless
    b) Bus and Star
    c) Physical and Logical (or Signal)
    d) LAN and WAN
    Answer: c) Physical and Logical (or Signal)

40. What refers to the geometric layout of the connected network?
    a) Logical Topology
    b) Physical Topology
    c) Network Architecture
    d) Data Flow
    Answer: b) Physical Topology

41. In which topology are every computer and network connected using a single cable, known as a Bus, transmitting data in a single direction?
    a) Ring Topology
    b) Star Topology
    c) Bus Topology
    d) Tree Topology
    Answer: c) Bus Topology

42. When a Bus topology has exactly two endpoints, what is it called?
    a) Dual Bus Topology
    b) Linear Bus topology
    c) Terminated Bus Topology
    d) Segmented Bus Topology
    Answer: b) Linear Bus topology

43. Bus networks were the original form of which type of network?
    a) Token Ring network
    b) Ethernet network
    c) FDDI network
    d) Wi-Fi network
    Answer: b) Ethernet network

44. In which topology are network nodes connected in a closed loop configuration, with each node directly connected to its adjacent node on both sides?
    a) Bus Topology
    b) Star Topology
    c) Ring Topology
    d) Mesh Topology
    Answer: c) Ring Topology

45. When the transmission in a Ring Topology is bidirectional by having two connections between each network node, what is it called?
    a) Full Ring Topology
    b) Dual Ring Topology
    c) Redundant Ring Topology
    d) Advanced Ring Topology
    Answer: b) Dual Ring Topology

46. In which topology are two or more star networks connected with a root node, forming a hierarchy, and is also called hierarchical topology?
    a) Bus Topology
    b) Ring Topology
    c) Tree Topology
    d) Mesh Topology
    Answer: c) Tree Topology

47. Tree topology should have at least how many levels to the hierarchy?
    a) One
    b) Two
    c) Three
    d) Four
    Answer: c) Three

48. Tree topology is typically used in which type of network?
    a) Local Area Network (LAN)
    b) Metropolitan Area Network (MAN)
    c) Wide Area Network (WAN)
    d) Personal Area Network (PAN)
    Answer: c) Wide Area Network (WAN)

49. In which topology are all nodes connected to a single central hub through a cable, and data sends from one node to another through this hub?
    a) Bus Topology
    b) Ring Topology
    c) Tree Topology
    d) Star Topology
    Answer: d) Star Topology

50. In a Star topology, what acts as a repeater for data flow?
    a) Node
    b) Cable
    c) Hub
    d) Server
    Answer: c) Hub

51. In which topology does every node carry traffic only between the two nodes it connects (point-to-point connection), and has n(n-1)/2 physical channels to link n devices?
    a) Star Topology
    b) Ring Topology
    c) Mesh Topology
    d) Hybrid Topology
    Answer: c) Mesh Topology

52. What is an example given for Mesh Topology where each telephone regional office needs to be connected to every other regional office?
    a) Local area network
    b) Campus network
    c) Interconnected regional offices
    d) Wireless network
    Answer: c) Interconnected regional offices

53. What are the two techniques to transmit data over the Mesh topology?
    a) Sending and Receiving
    b) Encoding and Decoding
    c) Routing and Flooding
    d) Simplex and Duplex
    Answer: c) Routing and Flooding

54. In Mesh topology, when the nodes have a routing logic to direct the data to reach the destination using the shortest distance, it is called:
    a) Flooding
    b) Routing
    c) Broadcasting
    d) Token Passing
    Answer: b) Routing

55. In Mesh topology, when the data is transmitted to all the nodes in the network, hence no routing is required, it is called:
    a) Routing
    b) Flooding
    c) Broadcasting
    d) Token Passing
    Answer: b) Flooding

56. In which type of Mesh Topology are some of the nodes connected to all nodes and some nodes connected only to some nodes?
    a) Full Mesh Topology
    b) Partial Mesh Topology
    c) Hybrid Mesh Topology
    d) Linear Mesh Topology
    Answer: b) Partial Mesh Topology

57. In which type of Mesh Topology is every node connected to each other?
    a) Partial Mesh Topology
    b) Full Mesh Topology
    c) Hybrid Mesh Topology
    d) Linear Mesh Topology
    Answer: b) Full Mesh Topology

58. What is a group of two or more topologies, which is scalable and reliable?
    a) Full Mesh Topology
    b) Dual Ring Topology
    c) Tree Topology
    d) Hybrid Topology
    Answer: d) Hybrid Topology

59. What denotes how the signals are transmitted from node to node across the system?
    a) Physical Topology
    b) Logical/Signal Topology
    c) Network Architecture
    d) Data Transmission Mode
    Answer: b) Logical/Signal Topology

60. What are the two types of Logical topology mentioned?
    a) Routing and Flooding
    b) Simplex and Duplex
    c) Broadcast and Token Passing
    d) Wired and Wireless
    Answer: c) Broadcast and Token Passing

61. In which logical topology is there no need for instructions, and Ethernet works in this transmission method?
    a) Token Passing
    b) Broadcast
    c) Routing
    d) Flooding
    Answer: b) Broadcast

62. In which logical topology is an electronic token passed to each node, allowing the node to send data when it receives the token?
    a) Broadcast
    b) Token Passing
    c) Flooding
    d) Routing
    Answer: b) Token Passing

63. Which of the following uses Token Passing?
    a) Ethernet
    b) Token Ring
    c) Fibre Distributed Data Interface (FDDI)
    d) Both b and c
    Answer: d) Both b and c

64. Bluetooth is an example of which of the following Networks?
    a) MAN
    b) PAN
    c) WPAN
    d) Both (1) & (2)
    Answer: b) PAN

65. Each telephone regional office needs to be connected to every other regional office. This is an example of which of the following topology?
    a) Bus Topology
    b) Tree Topology
    c) Star Topology
    d) Ring Topology
    e) Mesh Topology
    Answer: e) Mesh Topology

66. What is an intangible and logical arrangement that describes network communication between two systems by using different layer protocols?
    a) TCP/IP Model
    b) Network Topology
    c) OSI Model
    d) Network Architecture
    Answer: c) OSI Model

67. Which organization developed the OSI model?
    a) IEEE
    b) IETF
    c) ISO
    d) W3C
    Answer: c) ISO

68. How many layers does the OSI model have to transmit data from one system to another?
    a) Four
    b) Five
    c) Six
    d) Seven
    Answer: d) Seven

69. Which is the lowest layer in the OSI model, dealing with bit-level transmission and supporting mechanical and electrical specifications?
    a) Data Link Layer
    b) Physical Layer
    c) Network Layer
    d) Transport Layer
    Answer: b) Physical Layer

70. What is the data unit of the Physical Layer in the OSI model?
    a) Segment
    b) Packet
    c) Frame
    d) Bit
    Answer: d) Bit

71. Which of the following is a Physical Layer device?
    a) Switch
    b) Router
    c) Hub
    d) Bridge
    Answer: c) Hub

72. Which transmission modes are supported by the Physical Layer?
    a) Simplex
    b) Half-duplex
    c) Full-duplex
    d) All of the above
    Answer: d) All of the above

73. Which layer in the OSI model is responsible for encoding, decoding, and logical organization of data bits, making the physical layer appear error-free?
    a) Physical Layer
    b) Data Link Layer
    c) Network Layer
    d) Transport Layer
    Answer: b) Data Link Layer

74. What is the data unit of the Data Link Layer in the OSI model?
    a) Bit
    b) Segment
    c) Packet
    d) Frame
    Answer: d) Frame

75. Which of the following are Data Link Layer devices?
    a) Hub and Repeater
    b) Router and Gateway
    c) Switch and Bridge
    d) Modem and Firewall
    Answer: c) Switch and Bridge

76. The Data Link Layer has two sub-layers. What are they?
    a) Physical Address Control and Logical Address Control
    b) Media Access Control (MAC) and Logical Link Control (LLC)
    c) Frame Control and Error Control
    d) Data Framing and Data Addressing
    Answer: b) Media Access Control (MAC) and Logical Link Control (LLC)

77. Which sub-layer of the Data Link Layer is responsible for the physical address of the sender and/or receiver in the header of each frame?
    a) Logical Link Control (LLC)
    b) Media Access Control (MAC)
    c) Frame Management
    d) Error Checking
    Answer: b) Media Access Control (MAC)

78. Which sub-layer of the Data Link Layer is responsible for frame management, error checking, and flow control of data?
    a) Media Access Control (MAC)
    b) Logical Link Control (LLC)
    c) Physical Addressing
    d) Data Encoding
    Answer: b) Logical Link Control (LLC)

79. Which layer in the OSI model provides the shortest path for transmitting data, where data is transmitted in the form of packets, and includes the IP address in the header?
    a) Data Link Layer
    b) Network Layer
    c) Transport Layer
    d) Session Layer
    Answer: b) Network Layer

80. What is the data unit of the Network Layer in the OSI model?
    a) Bit
    b) Frame
    c) Packet
    d) Segment
    Answer: c) Packet

81. Which networking devices are used at the Network Layer?
    a) Hubs
    b) Switches
    c) Routers
    d) Modems
    Answer: c) Routers

82. Routing and Logical Addressing are the functions of which OSI layer?
    a) Data Link Layer
    b) Network Layer
    c) Transport Layer
    d) Session Layer
    Answer: b) Network Layer

83. Which layers are also known as the Hardware Layer in the OSI model?
    a) Application, Presentation, Session
    b) Transport, Network, Data Link
    c) Physical, Data Link, Network
    d) Session, Presentation, Physical
    Answer: c) Physical, Data Link, Network

84. Which layer is called the "Heart of OSI model" and is responsible for end-to-end network communication, flow control, error recovery, and reliability?
    a) Network Layer
    b) Transport Layer
    c) Session Layer
    d) Presentation Layer
    Answer: b) Transport Layer

85. What is the data in the Transport layer referred to as?
    a) Bits
    b) Frames
    c) Packets
    d) Segments
    Answer: d) Segments

86. Which layer is responsible for the establishment of the connection, maintenance of sessions, synchronization, and ensuring security by allowing checkpoints?
    a) Transport Layer
    b) Session Layer
    c) Presentation Layer
    d) Application Layer
    Answer: b) Session Layer

87. Which layer allows two systems into dialog in either half duplex or full duplex mode?
    a) Transport Layer
    b) Session Layer
    c) Presentation Layer
    d) Application Layer
    Answer: b) Session Layer

88. Which layer performs encryption and decryption of data, gives data in a readable format, and reduces the number of bits to be transmitted? It is also called the Translation layer and Syntax layer.
    a) Session Layer
    b) Presentation Layer
    c) Application Layer
    d) Transport Layer
    Answer: b) Presentation Layer

89. Converting ASCII code to EBCDIC coded text file is an example function of which OSI layer?
    a) Session Layer
    b) Presentation Layer
    c) Application Layer
    d) Data Link Layer
    Answer: b) Presentation Layer

90. Which layer focuses on process-to-process communication across an IP network, providing a communication interface and end-user services like email and web surfing? It is also called the Desktop Layer.
    a) Session Layer
    b) Presentation Layer
    c) Application Layer
    d) Transport Layer
    Answer: c) Application Layer

91. Which of the following protocols are used at the Application Layer in the OSI model?
    a) IP, ICMP
    b) HDLC, LSL
    c) HTTP, FTP, Telnet, SMTP, DNS
    d) TCP, UDP
    Answer: c) HTTP, FTP, Telnet, SMTP, DNS

92. Which layers are also known as the Upper Layers or Software Layers in the OSI model?
    a) Physical, Data Link, Network
    b) Transport, Session, Presentation
    c) Session, Presentation, Application
    d) Data Link, Network, Transport
    Answer: c) Session, Presentation, Application

93. Which model is described as a tangible, client-server model, and is one of the most used protocols in digital network communications, having only four layers?
    a) OSI Model
    b) TCP/IP Model
    c) Hybrid Model
    d) Network Architecture
    Answer: b) TCP/IP Model

94. What is the lowest layer in the TCP/IP model where the host connects to the network to send IP packets?
    a) Internet Layer
    b) Transport Layer
    c) Application Layer
    d) Host-to-Network Layer
    Answer: d) Host-to-Network Layer

95. Ethernet, Token Ring, FDDI, X.25, and Frame Relay are examples of protocols/technologies used in which layer of the TCP/IP model?
    a) Internet Layer
    b) Transport Layer
    c) Application Layer
    d) Host-to-Network Layer
    Answer: d) Host-to-Network Layer

96. Which layer in the TCP/IP model transfers Internet Protocol packets (IP datagrams) to the destination?
    a) Host-to-Network Layer
    b) Internet Layer
    c) Transport Layer
    d) Application Layer
    Answer: b) Internet Layer

97. IP, ICMP, ARP, RARP, and IGMP are protocols used in which layer of the TCP/IP model?
    a) Host-to-Network Layer
    b) Internet Layer
    c) Transport Layer
    d) Application Layer
    Answer: b) Internet Layer

98. Which layer in the TCP/IP model is similar to the Transport Layer in the OSI model and uses TCP and UDP?
    a) Internet Layer
    b) Transport Layer
    c) Application Layer
    d) Host-to-Network Layer
    Answer: b) Transport Layer

99. TELNET, FTP, SMTP, DNS, HTTP, NNTP, and DHCP are high-level protocols used in which layer of the TCP/IP model?
    a) Host-to-Network Layer
    b) Internet Layer
    c) Transport Layer
    d) Application Layer
    Answer: d) Application Layer

100. What refers to the way of transferring information or data between two connected devices?
    a) Data Transmission Media
    b) Data Transmission Modes
    c) Network Protocol
    d) Network Topology
    Answer: b) Data Transmission Modes

101. How many types of data transmission modes are there?
    a) One
    b) Two
    c) Three
    d) Four
    Answer: c) Three

102. In which data transmission mode can data be transferred in only one direction, with only one device transmitting and the other receiving?
    a) Half Duplex Mode
    b) Full Duplex Mode
    c) Simplex Mode
    d) Bi-directional Mode
    Answer: c) Simplex Mode

103. Which of the following is an example of Simplex Mode transmission?
    a) Walkie-talkie
    b) Telephone network
    c) Keyboard (input) and Monitor (output)
    d) Video conference
    Answer: c) Keyboard (input) and Monitor (output)

104. In which data transmission mode can data be transferred in both directions, but not at the same time?
    a) Simplex Mode
    b) Half Duplex Mode
    c) Full Duplex Mode
    d) Concurrent Mode
    Answer: b) Half Duplex Mode

105. Which of the following is an example of Half Duplex Mode transmission?
    a) Television broadcasting
    b) Walkie-talkie
    c) Telephone network
    d) Radio communication
    Answer: b) Walkie-talkie

106. In which data transmission mode can data be transferred in both directions on the same transmission path, using two lines for sending and receiving?
    a) Simplex Mode
    b) Half Duplex Mode
    c) Full Duplex Mode
    d) Uni-directional Mode
    Answer: c) Full Duplex Mode

107. Which of the following is an example of Full Duplex Mode transmission?
    a) Walkie-talkie
    b) Television
    c) Telephone network
    d) Fire alarm system
    Answer: c) Telephone network

108. What is the physical/wireless media through which data or information is transferred from one place to another?
    a) Data Transmission Modes
    b) Network Protocol
    c) Transmission Media
    d) Network Device
    Answer: c) Transmission Media

109. What are the two types of Transmission Media?
    a) Wired and Wireless
    b) Guided Media and Unguided Media
    c) Copper and Fiber Optic
    d) Short Range and Long Range
    Answer: b) Guided Media and Unguided Media

110. In which type of transmission media are signals transmitted through a narrow path made by physical links?
    a) Unguided Media
    b) Wireless Media
    c) Bounded Media
    d) Broadcast Media
    Answer: c) Bounded Media (or Guided Media)

111. Which of the following is NOT a type of Bounded Media mentioned?
    a) Twisted Pair cable
    b) Coaxial Cable
    c) Fibre-Optic Cable
    d) Radio waves
    Answer: d) Radio waves

112. Which types of guided media accept signals in the form of electric current?
    a) Fibre-Optic Cable
    b) Twisted-pair and coaxial cable
    c) Only Coaxial Cable
    d) Only Twisted Pair cable
    Answer: b) Twisted-pair and coaxial cable

113. Which type of guided media accepts signals in the form of light?
    a) Twisted Pair cable
    b) Coaxial Cable
    c) Fibre-Optic Cable
    d) All of the above
    Answer: c) Fibre-Optic Cable

114. In which type of transmission media are signals transmitted without using any cables, known as wireless communication?
    a) Guided Media
    b) Bounded Media
    c) Unguided Media
    d) Physical Media
    Answer: c) Unguided Media (or Unbounded Media)

115. Which of the following is a popular type of unguided transmission media?
    a) Copper wire
    b) Fibre-Optic Cable
    c) Microwaves
    d) Coaxial Cable
    Answer: c) Microwaves

116. Mobile phones, Satellite networks, and Wireless LANs use which type of unguided media?
    a) Radio Wave
    b) Infrared
    c) Microwave
    d) Ultrasonic Wave
    Answer: c) Microwave

117. Radio, Television, and Paging systems use which type of unguided media?
    a) Infrared
    b) Microwave
    c) Radio Wave
    d) Visible Light
    Answer: c) Radio Wave

118. Which type of unguided media is used for short-range communication like TV remote controls and IRD ports?
    a) Radio Wave
    b) Microwave
    c) Infrared
    d) Bluetooth
    Answer: c) Infrared

119. What is a networking device that connects multiple network hosts and sends data packets (frames) to all devices on a network?
    a) Switch
    b) Router
    c) Hub
    d) Bridge
    Answer: c) Hub

120. Which categories of Hub are mentioned?
    a) Wired and Wireless
    b) Active Hub (Repeaters) and Passive Hub
    c) Smart Hub and Dumb Hub
    d) Central Hub and Peripheral Hub
    Answer: b) Active Hub (Repeaters) and Passive Hub

121. What is a small hardware device that works at the layer of LAN, receives incoming data packets, filters them, and sends only to the intended receiver's interface?
    a) Hub
    b) Modem
    c) Switch
    d) Router
    Answer: c) Switch

122. What table does a Switch maintain, also known as a forwarding table or forwarding information base (FIB)?
    a) ARP table
    b) Routing table
    c) CAM (Content Addressable Memory) table
    d) DHCP table
    Answer: c) CAM (Content Addressable Memory) table

123. What is a hardware component that allows a computer to connect to the Internet and converts analog signals to digital signals (and vice versa)?
    a) Router
    b) Bridge
    c) Modem
    d) Gateway
    Answer: c) Modem

124. What is a hardware device responsible for routing traffic from one network to another, designed to receive, convert, and move packets?
    a) Switch
    b) Bridge
    c) Gateway
    d) Router
    Answer: d) Router

125. What is a network device that connects a local area network to another local area network that uses the same protocol?
    a) Router
    b) Gateway
    c) Bridge
    d) Repeater
    Answer: c) Bridge

126. What is a network node that connects two dissimilar networks using different protocols together?
    a) Bridge
    b) Router
    c) Gateway
    d) Switch
    Answer: c) Gateway

127. What is an electronic device that magnifies the signal it receives, implemented in computer networks to expand the coverage area? It is also known as a signal booster.
    a) Hub
    b) Switch
    c) Repeater
    d) Modem
    Answer: c) Repeater

128. What is a network security system that monitors and controls overall incoming and outgoing network traffic based on advanced and a defined set of security rules?
    a) Router
    b) Switch
    c) Firewall
    d) Intrusion Detection System
    Answer: c) Firewall



INTERNET

1.  What is the Internet defined as?
    (1) A local area network providing communication facilities.
    (2) A global computer network providing information and communication facilities.
    (3) A collection of unrelated computers.
    (4) A single server delivering web pages.
    (5) A private network inside a computer.
    Answer: (2) A global computer network providing information and communication facilities.

2.  Which standardized communication protocols are used by interconnected networks on the Internet?
    (1) HTML
    (2) HTTP
    (3) TCP/IP
    (4) URL
    (5) DNS
    Answer: (3) TCP/IP

3.  What was the world's first fully operational packet switching computer network?
    (1) Internet
    (2) WWW
    (3) ARPANET
    (4) NSFNET
    (5) Ethernet
    Answer: (3) ARPANET

4.  Which agency of the U.S. Department of Defense developed ARPANET?
    (1) National Science Foundation (NSF)
    (2) Department of Energy (DOE)
    (3) Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA)
    (4) National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
    (5) Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
    Answer: (3) Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA)

5.  In what year was ARPANET developed?
    (1) 1978
    (2) 1983
    (3) 1969
    (4) 1995
    (5) 2000
    Answer: (3) 1969

6.  How many computers were initially connected by ARPANET?
    (1) One hundred
    (2) Ten
    (3) Four
    (4) Twenty
    (5) Unlimited
    Answer: (3) Four

7.  In which year did ARPANET adopt TCP/IP, leading to the formation of the modern Internet?
    (1) 1969
    (2) 1978
    (3) 1983
    (4) 1990
    (5) 2000
    Answer: (3) 1983

8.  What is the "network of networks" referring to in the context of ARPANET's evolution?
    (1) Intranet
    (2) Extranet
    (3) Modern Internet
    (4) Local Area Network
    (5) Wide Area Network
    Answer: (3) Modern Internet

9.  What is WWW?
    (1) A hardware component of the Internet.
    (2) A collection of computer networks.
    (3) One of the services interconnected over the Internet.
    (4) A type of communication protocol.
    (5) A software application for accessing websites.
    Answer: (3) One of the services interconnected over the Internet.

10. What kind of content is collected on the World Wide Web?
    (1) Only text documents.
    (2) Information, resources, pictures, sounds, multimedia.
    (3) Only financial data.
    (4) Only software applications.
    (5) Raw data only.
    Answer: (2) Information, resources, pictures, sounds, multimedia.

11. What language is used to format information on the WWW?
    (1) TCP/IP
    (2) HTTP
    (3) URL
    (4) HTML
    (5) DNS
    Answer: (4) HTML

12. Through which protocol is information on the WWW accessed?
    (1) FTP
    (2) SMTP
    (3) HTTP
    (4) POP3
    (5) DNS
    Answer: (3) HTTP

13. What is the function of a Web Server?
    (1) To create web pages.
    (2) To browse the internet.
    (3) To store, process and deliver web pages to users.
    (4) To translate domain names into IP addresses.
    (5) To connect individual computers in a network.
    Answer: (3) To store, process and deliver web pages to users.

14. Which protocol is used for intercommunication between users and web servers?
    (1) FTP
    (2) SMTP
    (3) HTTP
    (4) TCP/IP
    (5) URL
    Answer: (3) HTTP

15. What is a Web Page primarily written in?
    (1) CSS
    (2) JavaScript
    (3) HTML
    (4) XML
    (5) Python
    Answer: (3) HTML

16. How is a Web Page accessed through the internet?
    (1) Using an email client.
    (2) Using a web browser.
    (3) Using a file manager.
    (4) Using an operating system.
    (5) Using a command prompt.
    Answer: (2) Using a web browser.

17. By what is a Web Page identified?
    (1) IP Address
    (2) Domain Name System
    (3) Uniform Resource Locator
    (4) Hostname
    (5) HTML
    Answer: (3) Uniform Resource Locator

18. What is a Web Browser?
    (1) A hardware device for internet connection.
    (2) A software application that allows users to access websites.
    (3) A database management system.
    (4) A programming language.
    (5) A communication protocol.
    Answer: (2) A software application that allows users to access websites.

19. Which of the following is NOT an example of a web browser according to the text?
    (1) Internet Explorer
    (2) Google Chrome
    (3) Opera
    (4) Ruby
    (5) Apple Safari
    Answer: (4) Ruby

20. What is the definition of a Home Page?
    (1) Any page on a website.
    (2) The default page of the website.
    (3) The last page viewed in a Browse session.
    (4) A page used for search results.
    (5) A page with multimedia content.
    Answer: (2) The default page of the website.

21. What is HTML used for?
    (1) To transfer data over the web.
    (2) To create web pages that are displayed on the Internet.
    (3) To translate domain names into IP addresses.
    (4) To store web pages.
    (5) To manage computer files.
    Answer: (2) To create web pages that are displayed on the Internet.

22. What is the primary function of HTTP?
    (1) To secure data transmission.
    (2) To manage network connections.
    (3) To transfer data over the web.
    (4) To define web page structure.
    (5) To provide IP addresses.
    Answer: (3) To transfer data over the web.

23. On top of which set of protocols does HTTP run?
    (1) FTP
    (2) SMTP
    (3) TCP/IP
    (4) DNS
    (5) URL
    Answer: (3) TCP/IP

24. What model does HTTP use for communication?
    (1) Peer-to-peer model
    (2) Broadcast model
    (3) Server-client model
    (4) Mesh model
    (5) Star model
    Answer: (3) Server-client model

25. What is TCP/IP?
    (1) A single communication protocol.
    (2) A set of communication protocols used to access the internet.
    (3) A type of web server.
    (4) A web browser.
    (5) A programming language.
    Answer: (2) A set of communication protocols used to access the internet.

26. Who developed TCP/IP and in what year?
    (1) Tim Berners-Lee in 1990
    (2) Vinton Cerf and Robert Kahn in 1978
    (3) Bill Gates in 1985
    (4) Steve Jobs in 1976
    (5) Linus Torvalds in 1991
    Answer: (2) Vinton Cerf and Robert Kahn in 1978


27. What is an Internet Host?
    (1) A type of internet service.
    (2) A computer or application used to transfer data on the internet.
    (3) A software program for creating web pages.
    (4) A unique identifier for a web page.
    (5) A physical network cable.
    Answer: (2) A computer or application used to transfer data on the internet.

28. What unique address does each Internet Host have?
    (1) URL
    (2) Domain Name
    (3) Hostname (also known as IP address)
    (4) Web Page ID
    (5) MAC Address
    Answer: (3) Hostname (also known as IP address)

29. What is an IP Address?
    (1) A text-based address for a website.
    (2) A logical numeric address used to identify the host over the internet network.
    (3) A protocol for transferring files.
    (4) A secret code for network security.
    (5) A programming language.
    Answer: (2) A logical numeric address used to identify the host over the internet network.

30. What is the bit length of the stable version of IP, IPv4?
    (1) 64 bits
    (2) 128 bits
    (3) 32 bits
    (4) 16 bits
    (5) 256 bits
    Answer: (3) 32 bits

31. How is IPv4 written and separated?
    (1) In hexadecimal, separated by colons.
    (2) In decimal, separated by periods.
    (3) In binary, separated by dashes.
    (4) In octal, separated by commas.
    (5) In text, separated by slashes.
    Answer: (2) In decimal, separated by periods.

32. What is the bit length of the latest version of IP, IPv6?
    (1) 32 bits
    (2) 64 bits
    (3) 128 bits
    (4) 256 bits
    (5) 48 bits
    Answer: (3) 128 bits

33. How is IPv6 written and separated?
    (1) In decimal, separated by periods.
    (2) In binary, separated by dashes.
    (3) In hexadecimal, separated by colons.
    (4) In octal, separated by spaces.
    (5) In text, separated by underscores.
    Answer: (3) In hexadecimal, separated by colons.

34. What is the purpose of a Uniform Resource Locator (URL)?
    (1) To identify an IP address.
    (2) To translate domain names.
    (3) To locate the address of a resource and protocol.
    (4) To transfer files between computers.
    (5) To display web pages.
    Answer: (3) To locate the address of a resource and protocol.

35. What is the function of a Domain Name?
    (1) To provide a physical address for a server.
    (2) To serve as an address which is used to access the website.
    (3) To encrypt data transmission.
    (4) To specify a file type.
    (5) To manage network security.
    Answer: (2) To serve as an address which is used to access the website.

36. Which of the following describes the `.com` Top Level Domain?
    (1) Network-oriented
    (2) Non-Profit Organization
    (3) Commercial
    (4) Education
    (5) Government
    Answer: (3) Commercial

37. Which of the following describes the `.net` Top Level Domain?
    (1) Commercial
    (2) Network-oriented
    (3) Non-Profit Organization
    (4) Education
    (5) Military
    Answer: (2) Network-oriented

38. Which of the following describes the `.org` Top Level Domain?
    (1) Commercial
    (2) Network-oriented
    (3) Non-Profit Organization
    (4) Government
    (5) Military
    Answer: (3) Non-Profit Organization

39. Which of the following describes the `.edu` Top Level Domain?
    (1) Commercial
    (2) Network-oriented
    (3) Non-Profit Organization
    (4) Education
    (5) International Treaties
    Answer: (4) Education

40. Which of the following describes the `.gov` Top Level Domain?
    (1) Commercial
    (2) Network-oriented
    (3) Non-Profit Organization
    (4) Education
    (5) Government
    Answer: (5) Government

41. Which of the following describes the `.mil` Top Level Domain?
    (1) Commercial
    (2) Network-oriented
    (3) Non-Profit Organization
    (4) Education
    (5) Military
    Answer: (5) Military

42. Which of the following describes the `.int` Top Level Domain?
    (1) Commercial
    (2) Network-oriented
    (3) Non-Profit Organization
    (4) Education
    (5) International Treaties
    Answer: (5) International Treaties

43. What is the function of the Domain Name System (DNS)?
    (1) To create domain names.
    (2) To translate domain names into IP addresses.
    (3) To store web pages.
    (4) To secure internet connections.
    (5) To provide internet access.
    Answer: (2) To translate domain names into IP addresses.

44. What kind of database does DNS have?
    (1) A small, local database.
    (2) A database of web server logs.
    (3) A large database of domain names and its IP addresses.
    (4) A database of user Browse history.
    (5) A database of programming languages.
    Answer: (3) A large database of domain names and its IP addresses.

45. What does "Uploading" refer to?
    (1) Copying files from the internet to the user’s computer.
    (2) Transmission of data or files from the computer to the internet server.
    (3) Deleting files from a server.
    (4) Storing files locally on a computer.
    (5) Creating new files on the internet.
    Answer: (2) Transmission of data or files from the computer to the internet server.

46. Who can retrieve an uploaded file?
    (1) Only the uploader.
    (2) Only authorized personnel.
    (3) Anyone.
    (4) Only the server administrator.
    (5) No one.
    Answer: (3) Anyone.

47. What is "Downloading"?
    (1) The transmission of data from the computer to the internet server.
    (2) The process of copying files from the internet to the user’s computer.
    (3) The act of deleting files from a server.
    (4) The process of creating new files on the internet.
    (5) The transfer of data between two local computers.
    Answer: (2) The process of copying files from the internet to the user’s computer.

48. What is Electronic mail (Email)?
    (1) A method for Browse web pages.
    (2) The transmission of messages over the internet.
    (3) A type of network hardware.
    (4) A programming language.
    (5) A database management system.
    Answer: (2) The transmission of messages over the internet.

49. What can a user attach in an email?
    (1) Only text messages.
    (2) Documents, pictures, videos etc.
    (3) Only executable files.
    (4) Only web links.
    (5) Nothing else besides the main message.
    Answer: (2) Documents, pictures, videos etc.

50. What is the purpose of Carbon Copy (CC) in an email?
    (1) To hide recipients from each other.
    (2) To share e-mail with one or more recipients where all recipients can see all mail addresses.
    (3) To send a message to a single main recipient only.
    (4) To encrypt the email message.
    (5) To set an automatic reply.
    Answer: (2) To share e-mail with one or more recipients where all recipients can see all mail addresses.

51. What is the characteristic of Blind Carbon Copy (BCC) in an email?
    (1) All recipients can see everyone who received the email.
    (2) Only the main recipient can see the BCC recipients.
    (3) The recipients of the message and other recipients (BCC) cannot see the persons who all receive the e-mail.
    (4) It automatically forwards the email to others.
    (5) It allows for file attachments only.
    Answer: (3) The recipients of the message and other recipients (BCC) cannot see the persons who all receive the e-mail.

---

MCQs from the provided "Answer keys" and "Solutions" sections (Internet/Browser/Windows Explorer):

52. Which of the following is NOT an Internet Browser?
    (1) Safari
    (2) Opera
    (3) Chromium
    (4) Ruby
    (5) Brave
    Answer: (4) Ruby

53. The Internet is a system of ______.
    (1) Computer Networks
    (2) Data Buses
    (3) Servers
    (4) WAN wires
    (5) None of these
    Answer: (1) Computer Networks

54. What is Window Explorer?
    (1) Web Browser
    (2) File Manager
    (3) OOPS Program
    (4) Operating System
    (5) Computer Instruction
    Answer: (2) File Manager

55. What is another name for a web browser, as mentioned in the solution?
    (1) Internet Host
    (2) Internet Browser
    (3) Web Server
    (4) Homepage
    (5) Web Page
    Answer: (2) Internet Browser

56. What are the pieces of content on the World Wide Web, such as pictures, videos, and web pages, connected using?
    (1) IP Addresses
    (2) URIs (Uniform Resource Identifiers) and hyperlinks
    (3) TCP/IP protocols
    (4) Email attachments
    (5) Domain names
    Answer: (2) URIs (Uniform Resource Identifiers) and hyperlinks

57. According to the solution, what kind of programming language is Ruby?
    (1) Low-level, general-purpose
    (2) Interpreted, high-level, general-purpose
    (3) Object-oriented, specialized
    (4) Assembly language
    (5) Machine code
    Answer: (2) Interpreted, high-level, general-purpose

58. Who designed and developed the Ruby programming language and when?
    (1) Bill Gates in the 1980s
    (2) Yukihiro "Matz" Matsumoto in the mid-1990s
    (3) Vinton Cerf in the 1970s
    (4) Guido van Rossum in the late 1980s
    (5) James Gosling in the early 1990s
    Answer: (2) Yukihiro "Matz" Matsumoto in the mid-1990s

59. In the context of the Internet, what is "the Net" sometimes called?
    (1) The World Wide Web
    (2) The Intranet
    (3) Simply "the Net"
    (4) The Global Network
    (5) The ARPAnet
    Answer: (3) Simply "the Net"

60. What was the original aim of ARPANET?
    (1) To create a commercial online service.
    (2) To develop a secure military communication system.
    (3) To allow users of a research computer at one university to "talk to" research computers at other universities.
    (4) To provide email services.
    (5) To host web pages.
    Answer: (3) To allow users of a research computer at one university to "talk to" research computers at other universities.

61. Which versions of Windows use Windows Explorer as their file manager?
    (1) Only Windows 95
    (2) Windows 95 and later versions
    (3) Only Windows XP
    (4) All versions of Windows
    (5) Only Windows 10
    Answer: (2) Windows 95 and later versions

62. Besides managing files and folders, what new features has Windows Explorer grown to support?
    (1) Only email management.
    (2) Only spreadsheet calculations.
    (3) Playing audio and videos and launching programs, etc.
    (4) Only web Browse.
    (5) Only database management.
    Answer: (3) Playing audio and videos and launching programs, etc.

63. Which components also form part of Windows Explorer?
    (1) Only the taskbar.
    (2) Only the desktop.
    (3) The desktop and the taskbar.
    (4) The control panel.
    (5) The start menu.
    Answer: (3) The desktop and the taskbar.

64. What is Hacking defined as?
    (1) Legitimate access to a computer system for maintenance.
    (2) An attempt to exploit a computer system or a private network inside a computer.
    (3) The creation of new software.
    (4) The process of securing a network.
    (5) The authorized transfer of data.
    Answer: (2) An attempt to exploit a computer system or a private network inside a computer.

65. For what purpose is unauthorized access or control over computer network security systems typically used in hacking?
    (1) Educational purposes.
    (2) Illicit purpose.
    (3) System optimization.
    (4) Data backup.
    (5) Software development.
    Answer: (2) Illicit purpose.

66. Which of the following is NOT listed as a technique for hacking in the provided text?
    (1) Viruses
    (2) Keyloggers
    (3) Rootkit
    (4) Firewall
    (5) Spoofing attack
    Answer: (4) Firewall

67. What is a computer virus?
    (1) A beneficial software program that enhances computer performance.
    (2) A malicious software program loaded onto a user’s computer without the user’s knowledge and performs malicious actions.
    (3) A program that protects against malware.
    (4) A type of operating system.
    (5) A hardware component.
    Answer: (2) A malicious software program loaded onto a user’s computer without the user’s knowledge and performs malicious actions.

68. Which of the following is listed as an example of a computer virus?
    (1) Microsoft Word
    (2) Stuxnet
    (3) Google Chrome
    (4) Adobe Photoshop
    (5) Windows Explorer
    Answer: (2) Stuxnet

69. What was the first self-replicating computer program to spread on a large scale?
    (1) Melissa
    (2) WannaCry
    (3) Elk Cloner virus
    (4) Code Red
    (5) Zeus
    Answer: (3) Elk Cloner virus

70. Who created the Elk Cloner virus and when?
    (1) Bob Kahn in 1978
    (2) Vint Cerf in 1978
    (3) Rich Skrenta in 1982
    (4) Tim Berners-Lee in 1990
    (5) Bill Gates in 1985
    Answer: (3) Rich Skrenta in 1982

71. How old was Rich Skrenta when he created the Elk Cloner virus?
    (1) 12 years old
    (2) 20 years old
    (3) 15 years old
    (4) 18 years old
    (5) 25 years old
    Answer: (3) 15 years old

72. Which ransomware family of newly discovered viruses are mentioned?
    (1) Code Red and Melissa
    (2) Sasser and Zeus
    (3) Ryuk and Troldesh
    (4) Crypto Locker and Flashback
    (5) Stuxnet and Petya
    Answer: (3) Ryuk and Troldesh

73. What is a computer worm?
    (1) A legitimate software program.
    (2) A malicious, self-replicating software program (malware) which affects the functions of software and hardware programs.
    (3) A hardware component that prevents viruses.
    (4) A type of web browser.
    (5) A database for storing user information.
    Answer: (2) A malicious, self-replicating software program (malware) which affects the functions of software and hardware programs.

74. Which is cited as the most famous computer worm?
    (1) Petya
    (2) WannaCry
    (3) Stuxnet
    (4) Melissa
    (5) MyDoom
    Answer: (3) Stuxnet

75. What is Ransomware?
    (1) A type of antivirus software.
    (2) A type of malware program that infects and takes control of a system with the intention of extorting money from its owner.
    (3) A program that optimizes system performance.
    (4) A tool for data recovery.
    (5) A network security protocol.
    Answer: (2) A type of malware program that infects and takes control of a system with the intention of extorting money from its owner.

76. What is a Botnet?
    (1) A single, isolated computer.
    (2) A set of networks connected computers/devices that are used for malicious purposes.
    (3) A secure network for legitimate communication.
    (4) A type of firewall.
    (5) A software development kit.
    Answer: (2) A set of networks connected computers/devices that are used for malicious purposes.

77. What is each computer in a botnet called?
    (1) Host
    (2) Server
    (3) Zombie (or Bot)
    (4) Client
    (5) Rootkit
    Answer: (3) Zombie (or Bot)

78. What is a Trojan horse?
    (1) A beneficial program that boosts system speed.
    (2) A type of malware that presents itself as legitimate software but installs malware actions.
    (3) A hardware component for data storage.
    (4) An operating system.
    (5) A network protocol for secure communication.
    Answer: (2) A type of malware that presents itself as legitimate software but installs malware actions.

79. What does a Keylogger do?
    (1) Encrypts data to protect it.
    (2) Blocks malicious websites.
    (3) Stores all keystrokes of a computer.
    (4) Speeds up internet connection.
    (5) Manages software installations.
    Answer: (3) Stores all keystrokes of a computer.

80. What kind of information can a Keylogger record?
    (1) Only system errors.
    (2) Only internet usage data.
    (3) Usernames, passwords, credit card numbers, and personal documents.
    (4) Only hardware specifications.
    (5) Only operating system updates.
    Answer: (3) Usernames, passwords, credit card numbers, and personal documents.

81. What is a Rootkit?
    (1) A program designed to optimize system performance.
    (2) A secret computer program designed to provide continued access to a computer while actively hiding its presence.
    (3) An antivirus software.
    (4) A file compression utility.
    (5) A network monitoring tool.
    Answer: (2) A secret computer program designed to provide continued access to a computer while actively hiding its presence.

82. With what type of malware are Rootkits associated?
    (1) Only beneficial software.
    (2) Only operating systems.
    (3) Trojans, worms, viruses.
    (4) Only web browsers.
    (5) Only email clients.
    Answer: (3) Trojans, worms, viruses.

83. How is Spyware installed on a computing device?
    (1) With the end user's full knowledge and consent.
    (2) Without the end user's knowledge.
    (3) Only through direct physical access.
    (4) Only on mobile phones.
    (5) Only on corporate networks.
    Answer: (2) Without the end user's knowledge.

84. What kind of information does Spyware steal?
    (1) Only software license keys.
    (2) Internet usage data and sensitive information such as usernames and passwords.
    (3) Only hardware diagnostic data.
    (4) Only network configuration.
    (5) Only system logs.
    Answer: (2) Internet usage data and sensitive information such as usernames and passwords.

85. What physical activities can Spyware enable on a computer?
    (1) Controlling external devices like printers.
    (2) Activating the microphone or camera to record physical activity.
    (3) Changing display settings.
    (4) Adjusting volume levels.
    (5) Sending faxes.
    Answer: (2) Activating the microphone or camera to record physical activity.

86. What is Adware designed to do?
    (1) Protect against viruses.
    (2) Display advertisements on the computer screen to generate income.
    (3) Block all advertisements.
    (4) Optimize internet speed.
    (5) Manage email accounts.
    Answer: (2) Display advertisements on the computer screen to generate income.

87. What is a characteristic of ads displayed by Adware?
    (1) They are always relevant to the user.
    (2) They can be easily removed.
    (3) They cannot be removed easily.
    (4) They only appear on specific websites.
    (5) They are always static images.
    Answer: (3) They cannot be removed easily.

88. What is Phishing?
    (1) A cyber-defense technique.
    (2) A cyber-attack that used to steal user data, including login credentials and credit card numbers.
    (3) A method for secure online banking.
    (4) A tool for managing email accounts.
    (5) A way to create secure passwords.
    Answer: (2) A cyber-attack that used to steal user data, including login credentials and credit card numbers.

89. What weapon do phishing attacks commonly use to trick recipients?
    (1) SMS messages
    (2) Email
    (3) Social media posts
    (4) Phone calls
    (5) Physical letters
    Answer: (2) Email

90. What is the goal of a phishing email?
    (1) To provide legitimate software updates.
    (2) To trick the email recipient into believing that the message is received from real companies such as banks, Amazon etc to harvest the recipient’s details.
    (3) To offer free products.
    (4) To improve network security.
    (5) To conduct market research.
    Answer: (2) To trick the email recipient into believing that the message is received from real companies such as banks, Amazon etc to harvest the recipient’s details.

91. Which of the following is a technique of Phishing that targets special persons or organizations?
    (1) Email Phishing
    (2) Smurfing
    (3) Spear Phishing
    (4) Ransomware
    (5) Adware
    Answer: (3) Spear Phishing

92. ______ is a type of denial-of-service attack that relies on flooding a network with a large volume of traffic through the manipulation of IP addresses in that network.
    (1) Phishing
    (2) Hacking
    (3) Smurfing
    (4) Churning
    (5) Twisting
    Answer: (3) Smurfing

93. What is the outcome of a Smurfing attack on a server or IT setup?
    (1) Increased security.
    (2) Reduced network traffic.
    (3) A high volume of excess activity, which can overwhelm a server or IT setup.
    (4) Improved system performance.
    (5) Faster data transfer.
    Answer: (3) A high volume of excess activity, which can overwhelm a server or IT setup.

94. What is the full form of ASCII?
    (1) American Standard Computer Information Interface
    (2) Advanced System Code for Internet Information
    (3) American Standard Code For Information Interchange
    (4) Automated Security Code for Internet Integrity
    (5) Analog Signal Conversion for Information Input
    Answer: (3) American Standard Code For Information Interchange

95. What does ALU stand for?
    (1) Advanced Logic Unit
    (2) Arithmetic Logic Unit
    (3) Automatic Link Utility
    (4) Analog Light Unit
    (5) Array Logic Upgrader
    Answer: (2) Arithmetic Logic Unit

96. ALGOL is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Algorithm Gate Operation Language
    (2) Algorithmic Language
    (3) Automated Logical Operations Gateway
    (4) Advanced Logic Organization Language
    (5) All-purpose Logic Gateway Operating Language
    Answer: (2) Algorithmic Language

97. What is the full form of ARP?
    (1) Address Resolution Protocol
    (2) Advanced Routing Protocol
    (3) Asynchronous Response Protocol
    (4) Automated Resource Parser
    (5) Application Request Processor
    Answer: (1) Address Resolution Protocol

98. API stands for what?
    (1) Advanced Programming Interface
    (2) Application Program Interface
    (3) Automated Processing Integration
    (4) Analog Peripheral Interface
    (5) Access Point Indicator
    Answer: (2) Application Program Interface

99. What does ATM stand for in the context of computers?
    (1) Automated Teller Machine
    (2) Asynchronous Transfer Mode
    (3) Automatic Traffic Management
    (4) Advanced Technology Module
    (5) Analog Transmission Method
    Answer: (2) Asynchronous Transfer Mode

100. What is AI the abbreviation for?
    (1) Automated Information
    (2) Artificial Intelligence
    (3) Advanced Internet
    (4) Analog Interface
    (5) Application Integration
    Answer: (2) Artificial Intelligence

101. BASIC stands for what?
    (1) Binary All-purpose Scientific Instruction Code
    (2) Beginner’s All-purpose Symbolic Instruction Code
    (3) Business Application Software Integration Code
    (4) Basic Assembly System for Integrated Circuits
    (5) Broadband Access System for Internet Connectivity
    Answer: (2) Beginner’s All-purpose Symbolic Instruction Code

102. What is the full form of BIOS?
    (1) Binary Input Output System
    (2) Basic Input Output System
    (3) Business Information Operating System
    (4) Broadband Internet Operating System
    (5) Byte Instruction Operating System
    Answer: (2) Basic Input Output System

103. What does Bit stand for?
    (1) Binary Information Transfer
    (2) Basic Internet Technology
    (3) Byte Indicator Test
    (4) Binary Digit
    (5) Bus Interface Transmission
    Answer: (4) Binary Digit

104. What is the full form of BCC?
    (1) Basic Carbon Copy
    (2) Blind Carbon Copy
    (3) Business Control Center
    (4) Binary Communication Code
    (5) Broad Client Connection
    Answer: (2) Blind Carbon Copy

105. What does BIU stand for?
    (1) Basic Input Unit
    (2) Bus Interface Unit
    (3) Binary Instruction Unit
    (4) Broadband Internet Usage
    (5) Business Information Utility
    Answer: (2) Bus Interface Unit

106. BIS is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Binary Information System
    (2) Basic Internet Service
    (3) Business Information System
    (4) Broadband Internet Solution
    (5) Byte Instruction System
    Answer: (3) Business Information System

107. What is the full form of BPS?
    (1) Bytes Per Second
    (2) Bits Per Second
    (3) Binary Processing Speed
    (4) Basic Packet System
    (5) Broadband Packet Service
    Answer: (2) Bits Per Second

108. BCR stands for what?
    (1) Binary Code Reader
    (2) Bar Code Reader
    (3) Basic Character Recognition
    (4) Business Communication Record
    (5) Broadband Connection Router
    Answer: (2) Bar Code Reader

109. What does BIPS stand for?
    (1) Bytes In Parallel System
    (2) Basic Instruction Processing System
    (3) Billion Instruction Per Second
    (4) Binary Information Processing System
    (5) Broadband Internet Packet Service
    Answer: (3) Billion Instruction Per Second

110. BRD is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Basic Read Drive
    (2) Binary Record Device
    (3) Blu-Ray Disc
    (4) Broadcast Data
    (5) Bus Router Device
    Answer: (3) Blu-Ray Disc

111. What is the full form of CAD?
    (1) Computer Aided Design
    (2) Central Access Device
    (3) Code Analysis and Design
    (4) Common Access Database
    (5) Computer Assisted Drawing
    Answer: (1) Computer Aided Design

112. What does CAM stand for?
    (1) Computer Aided Manufacturing
    (2) Central Access Module
    (3) Control Area Management
    (4) Common Access Method
    (5) Computer Assisted Maintenance
    Answer: (1) Computer Aided Manufacturing

113. CADD is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Computer Aided Data Display
    (2) Common Access Data Directory
    (3) Computer Aided Design and Drafting
    (4) Centralized Automatic Data Device
    (5) Computer Assisted Digital Drawing
    Answer: (3) Computer Aided Design and Drafting

114. What is the full form of CAN?
    (1) Computer Area Network
    (2) Campus Area Network
    (3) Centralized Access Network
    (4) Common Area Network
    (5) Client Area Network
    Answer: (2) Campus Area Network

115. What does CC stand for in email?
    (1) Carbon Control
    (2) Command Control
    (3) Carbon Copy
    (4) Central Computer
    (5) Client Connection
    Answer: (3) Carbon Copy

116. CD is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Compact Data
    (2) Central Drive
    (3) Compact Disk
    (4) Computer Device
    (5) Control Data
    Answer: (3) Compact Disk

117. What is the full form of CDROM?
    (1) Compact Disk Read Only Memory
    (2) Central Data Read Only Memory
    (3) Computer Disk Read Only Module
    (4) Compact Disk Random Optical Memory
    (5) Control Data Read Only Module
    Answer: (1) Compact Disk Read Only Memory

118. CD-R stands for what?
    (1) Compact Disk - Retrieval
    (2) Compact Disk - Recordable
    (3) Central Data - Reader
    (4) Computer Disk - Random
    (5) Control Disk - Record
    Answer: (2) Compact Disk - Recordable

119. What does CD-RW stand for?
    (1) Compact Disk - Random Write
    (2) Compact Disk Rewritable
    (3) Central Data - Read/Write
    (4) Computer Disk - Read and Write
    (5) Control Disk - Rewind
    Answer: (2) Compact Disk Rewritable

120. CD-WO is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Compact Disk - Write Once
    (2) Compact Disk - Write Only
    (3) Central Data - Wireless Output
    (4) Computer Disk - Web Output
    (5) Control Disk - Without Optics
    Answer: (1) Compact Disk - Write Once

121. What is the full form of COBOL?
    (1) Common Business Oriented Language
    (2) Computer Basic Operational Language
    (3) Commercial Business Online Language
    (4) Common Binary Operational Language
    (5) Client Object-Oriented Business Language
    Answer: (1) Common Business Oriented Language

122. CPI stands for what?
    (1) Central Processing Instruction
    (2) Clock / Cycle Per Instruction
    (3) Common Program Interface
    (4) Computer Performance Indicator
    (5) Control Process Identifier
    Answer: (2) Clock / Cycle Per Instruction

123. What does CPU stand for?
    (1) Central Program Unit
    (2) Computer Processing Unit
    (3) Central Processing Unit
    (4) Common Processing Utility
    (5) Control Panel Unit
    Answer: (3) Central Processing Unit

124. CRT is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Cathode Ray Tube
    (2) Computerized Remote Terminal
    (3) Central Research Technology
    (4) Control Response Time
    (5) Common Resource Terminal
    Answer: (1) Cathode Ray Tube

125. What is the full form of CASE?
    (1) Computer Aided System Engineering
    (2) Computer-Aided Software Engineering
    (3) Centralized Application System Emulator
    (4) Common Access System Environment
    (5) Computer Assisted Software Execution
    Answer: (2) Computer-Aided Software Engineering

126. CPS stands for what?
    (1) Cycles Per Second
    (2) Characters Per Second
    (3) Commands Per Second
    (4) Control Program System
    (5) Central Processing System
    Answer: (2) Characters Per Second

127. What does CROM stand for?
    (1) Central Read Only Memory
    (2) Control Read-Only Memory
    (3) Cache Read Only Memory
    (4) Computerized Read Out Memory
    (5) Common Read-Only Module
    Answer: (2) Control Read-Only Memory

128. DVD is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Digital Video Disk
    (2) Digital Versatile Disk
    (3) Data Virtual Drive
    (4) Dynamic Video Display
    (5) Disk Video Digital
    Answer: (2) Digital Versatile Disk

129. What is the full form of DVI?
    (1) Digital Video Interface
    (2) Data Visual Input
    (3) Direct Video Interconnection
    (4) Dynamic Visual Integration
    (5) Digital Versatile Input
    Answer: (1) Digital Video Interface

130. DVDR stands for what?
    (1) Digital Video Disk Read
    (2) Digital Versatile Disk Random
    (3) Digital Versatile Disk Recordable
    (4) Data Video Drive Recorder
    (5) Dynamic Video Disk Reading
    Answer: (3) Digital Versatile Disk Recordable

131. What does DVDRW stand for?
    (1) Digital Video Disk Read/Write
    (2) Digital Versatile Disk Read/Write
    (3) Digital Versatile Disk Rewritable
    (4) Data Video Drive Rewind
    (5) Dynamic Video Disk Recording
    Answer: (3) Digital Versatile Disk Rewritable

132. DRAM is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Digital Random Access Memory
    (2) Dynamic Read Access Memory
    (3) Dynamic Random-Access Memory
    (4) Data Random Access Module
    (5) Direct Random Access Memory
    Answer: (3) Dynamic Random-Access Memory

133. What is the full form of DBMS?
    (1) Digital Business Management System
    (2) Data Base Management System
    (3) Dynamic Binary Management System
    (4) Distributed Business Management System
    (5) Direct Byte Management System
    Answer: (2) Data Base Management System

134. DNS stands for what?
    (1) Digital Network Service
    (2) Domain Name Service
    (3) Data Naming System
    (4) Domain Name System
    (5) Dynamic Network Structure
    Answer: (4) Domain Name System

135. What does DHTML stand for?
    (1) Digital Hypertext Mark-up Language
    (2) Dynamic Hyper Text Mark-up Language
    (3) Data Hypertext Management Language
    (4) Document Hyperlink Transfer Markup Language
    (5) Design Hypertext Tool Markup Language
    Answer: (2) Dynamic Hyper Text Mark-up Language

136. DPI is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Digital Picture Interface
    (2) Data Packet Indicator
    (3) Dots Per Inch
    (4) Direct Pixel Input
    (5) Disk Processing Information
    Answer: (3) Dots Per Inch

137. What is the full form of DVR?
    (1) Digital Video Recording
    (2) Data Virtualization Recorder
    (3) Digital Video Recorder
    (4) Dynamic Video Resource
    (5) Direct Video Reader
    Answer: (3) Digital Video Recorder

138. DOS stands for what?
    (1) Digital Operating System
    (2) Disk Operating System
    (3) Data Output System
    (4) Distributed Operating Service
    (5) Dynamic Operating Solution
    Answer: (2) Disk Operating System

139. What does DTP stand for?
    (1) Digital Text Processing
    (2) Data Transfer Protocol
    (3) Desk-Top Publishing
    (4) Document Type Protocol
    (5) Distributed Task Processing
    Answer: (3) Desk-Top Publishing

140. EDP is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Electronic Data Protection
    (2) Enhanced Data Processing
    (3) Electronic Data Processing
    (4) Enterprise Data Platform
    (5) Encrypted Data Packet
    Answer: (3) Electronic Data Processing

141. What is the full form of EDSAC?
    (1) Electronic Data Storage Automatic Computer
    (2) Electronic Delay Storage Automatic Calculator
    (3) Encrypted Digital Storage Automatic Calculator
    (4) Electronic Data System Automatic Controller
    (5) Enhanced Digital Storage Advanced Calculator
    Answer: (2) Electronic Delay Storage Automatic Calculator

142. EEPROM stands for what?
    (1) Electric Erasable Programmable Read Only Memory
    (2) Electronically Erasable Programmable Read Only Memory
    (3) Enhanced Erasable Program Read Only Memory
    (4) Easy Erase Program Read Only Memory
    (5) Electronic Erasable Persistent Read Only Memory
    Answer: (2) Electronically Erasable Programmable Read Only Memory

143. What does EFS stand for?
    (1) Electronic File System
    (2) Encrypted File System
    (3) Extended File System
    (4) Enterprise File System
    (5) Error Free System
    Answer: (2) Encrypted File System

144. ENIAC is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Electronic Numerical Integrator And Computer
    (2) Electrical Network Integrated Automatic Computer
    (3) Enhanced Numeric Interface And Control
    (4) Electronic New Information And Computer
    (5) Essential Numerical Instruction And Calculation
    Answer: (1) Electronics Numerical Integrator And Calculator

145. What is the full form of EPROM?
    (1) Electronic Programmable Read Only Memory
    (2) Erasable Programmable Read Only Memory
    (3) Enhanced Program Read Only Memory
    (4) Electric Permanent Read Only Memory
    (5) Essential Program Read Only Memory
    Answer: (2) Erasable Programmable Read Only Memory

146. EROM stands for what?
    (1) Erasable Read Only Memory
    (2) Electronic Read Only Memory
    (3) Enhanced Read Only Module
    (4) Easy Read Only Memory
    (5) Essential Read Only Module
    Answer: (1) Erasable Read Only Memory

147. What does ESDI stand for?
    (1) Enhanced System Device Interface
    (2) Electronic Standard Disk Interface
    (3) Enhanced Small Device Interface
    (4) Extended System Data Interface
    (5) Efficient Storage Device Interface
    Answer: (3) Enhanced Small Device Interface

148. FORTRAN is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Formula Translator
    (2) Formula Translation
    (3) FORmula TRANsfer
    (4) FORecasting TRANslator
    (5) FORmatted TRANsaction
    Answer: (2) Formula Translation

149. What is the full form of FTP?
    (1) File Transfer Protocol
    (2) Fast Transfer Protocol
    (3) File Transmission Procedure
    (4) Free Transfer Program
    (5) Flexible Transfer Protocol
    Answer: (1) File Transfer Protocol

150. FDD stands for what?
    (1) Fast Disk Drive
    (2) Floppy Disk Drive
    (3) File Data Drive
    (4) Flash Disk Driver
    (5) Flexible Disk Device
    Answer: (2) Floppy Disk Drive

151. What does FDC stand for?
    (1) Fast Data Controller
    (2) Floppy Disk Controller
    (3) File Data Controller
    (4) Flash Drive Control
    (5) Flexible Data Control
    Answer: (2) Floppy Disk Controller

152. FPS is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Files Per Second
    (2) Frames Per Second
    (3) Fast Processing Speed
    (4) File Protection System
    (5) Function Per Second
    Answer: (2) Frames Per Second

153. What is the full form of FLOPS?
    (1) Flexible Operations Per Second
    (2) Floating Point Operations Per Second
    (3) File Operations Per System
    (4) Fixed Logic Operations Per Second
    (5) Fast Logic Operations Per System
    Answer: (2) Floating Point Operations Per Second

154. FAT stands for what?
    (1) File Access Table
    (2) File Allocation Table
    (3) Fast Access Time
    (4) File Arrangement Table
    (5) Flexible Access Table
    Answer: (2) File Allocation Table

155. What does FAX stand for?
    (1) Fast Access Xerox
    (2) Far Away Xerox/ facsimile
    (3) File Access X-changer
    (4) Fixed Axis Xerox
    (5) Full Access X-mission
    Answer: (2) Far Away Xerox/ facsimile

156. GDI is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) General Data Interface
    (2) Graphical Device Interface
    (3) Global Data Interconnect
    (4) Graphics Display Information
    (5) Gateway Device Interface
    Answer: (2) Graphical Device Interface

157. What is the full form of GIF?
    (1) General Image Format
    (2) Graphic Interchangeable Format
    (3) Global Information File
    (4) Graphic Information Format
    (5) Graphical Internet Format
    Answer: (2) Graphic Interchangeable Format

158. GIS stands for what?
    (1) General Information System
    (2) Geographic Information System
    (3) Global Internet Service
    (4) Graphical Interface System
    (5) Gateway Information System
    Answer: (2) Geographic Information System

159. What does GML stand for?
    (1) General Markup Language
    (2) Geography Mark-up Language
    (3) Global Media Language
    (4) Graphical Modeling Language
    (5) Gateway Markup Language
    Answer: (2) Geography Mark-up Language

160. GPRS is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) General Packet Radio Service
    (2) Global Position Radio System
    (3) General Protocol Radio Service
    (4) Global Packet Routing System
    (5) Gateway Packet Radio Standard
    Answer: (1) General Packet Radio Service

161. What is the full form of GUI?
    (1) General User Interface
    (2) Graphical User Interface
    (3) Global Utility Interface
    (4) Gateway User Interconnect
    (5) Graphics User Interaction
    Answer: (2) Graphical User Interface

162. GSM stands for what?
    (1) General System for Mobile Communication
    (2) Global System for Mobile Communication
    (3) Gateway System for Mobile Connectivity
    (4) Global Standard for Mobile
    (5) General Service Mobile
    Answer: (2) Global System for Mobile Communication

163. What does HTTP stand for?
    (1) Hyper Text Transmission Protocol
    (2) Hyper Text Transfer Protocol
    (3) High Traffic Transfer Protocol
    (4) Host Transfer Text Protocol
    (5) Hierarchical Text Transfer Protocol
    Answer: (2) Hyper Text Transfer Protocol

164. HTTPS is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Hyper Text Transfer Protocol Secure
    (2) High Traffic Transfer Protocol Secure
    (3) Host Transfer Text Protocol Secure
    (4) Hyper Text Transmission Protocol Secure
    (5) Hyper Text Tool Protocol Secured
    Answer: (1) Hyper Text Transfer Protocol Secure

165. What is the full form of HTML?
    (1) High-level Text Markup Language
    (2) Hyper Text Markup Language
    (3) Hyperlink Text Markup Language
    (4) Home Text Markup Language
    (5) Horizontal Text Markup Language
    Answer: (2) Hyper Text Mark-up Language

166. HVD stands for what?
    (1) High Definition Video
    (2) Holographic Versatile Disc
    (3) Horizontal Vertical Display
    (4) Hybrid Video Device
    (5) High Volume Drive
    Answer: (2) Holographic Versatile Disc

167. What does HD stand for?
    (1) High Definition
    (2) Hard Disk
    (3) High Density
    (4) Home Drive
    (5) Host Device
    Answer: (2) Hard Disk

168. HDD is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) High Definition Drive
    (2) Hard Disk Drive
    (3) Home Data Drive
    (4) Host Device Driver
    (5) High Density Disk
    Answer: (2) Hard Disk Drive

169. What is the full form of ISP?
    (1) Internet Service Provider
    (2) International Service Protocol
    (3) Information Security Provider
    (4) Internet System Protocol
    (5) Integrated Service Provider
    Answer: (1) Internet Service Provider

170. IP stands for what?
    (1) Internet Program
    (2) Internal Protocol
    (3) Internet Protocol
    (4) Information Process
    (5) Integrated Packet
    Answer: (3) Internet Protocol

171. IOP is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Integrated Output Processor
    (2) Input Output Processor
    (3) Internet Only Processor
    (4) Internal Operations Processor
    (5) Isolated Operating Processor
    Answer: (2) Input Output Processor

172. What is the full form of IBM?
    (1) International Business Management
    (2) Internet Business Machines
    (3) Integrated Business Machines
    (4) International Business Machines
    (5) Interconnected Business Management
    Answer: (4) International Business Machines

173. IC stands for what?
    (1) Internal Chip
    (2) Integrated Circuit
    (3) Internet Connection
    (4) Information Control
    (5) Input Circuit
    Answer: (2) Integrated Circuit

174. What does ICT stand for?
    (1) Internet Communication Technology
    (2) Information Communication Technology
    (3) Integrated Computer Technology
    (4) International Communication Tools
    (5) Information Control Technology
    Answer: (2) Information Communication Technology

175. IMAP is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Internet Mail Access Protocol
    (2) Internet Message Access Protocol
    (3) Integrated Mail Access Protocol
    (4) Instant Message Access Protocol
    (5) Interactive Mail Application Protocol
    Answer: (2) Internet Message Access Protocol

176. What is the full form of ISO?
    (1) Indian Standards Organization
    (2) International Software Organization
    (3) International Standards Organisation
    (4) Internet Service Organization
    (5) Information System Optimization
    Answer: (3) International Standards Organisation

177. INTEL stands for what?
    (1) International Electronics
    (2) Integrated Electronics
    (3) Internet Technology
    (4) Information Technology
    (5) Input/Output Electronics
    Answer: (2) Integrated Electronics

178. What does IVR stand for?
    (1) Internet Voice Response
    (2) Interactive Voice Response
    (3) Integrated Voice Recorder
    (4) Input Voice Recognition
    (5) Intelligent Voice Routing
    Answer: (2) Interactive Voice Response

179. What does JAR stand for?
    (1) Jumper
    (2) Java Application Resource
    (3) Java Arsenal
    (4) Java Virtual Machine
    (5) Java Archive
    Answer: (5) Java Archive

180. JPEG is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Joint Picture Expert Group
    (2) Joint Photographic Expert Group
    (3) Java Picture Encoding Group
    (4) Joint Processing Expert Group
    (5) Joint Program Execution Group
    Answer: (2) Joint Photographic Expert Group

181. What is the full form of JSP?
    (1) Java System Protocol
    (2) Joint Service Provider
    (3) Java Server Page
    (4) JavaScript Protocol
    (5) Java Security Program
    Answer: (3) Java Server Page

182. LAN stands for what?
    (1) Large Area Network
    (2) Local Area Network
    (3) Long Access Network
    (4) Logical Area Network
    (5) Line Area Network
    Answer: (2) Local Area Network

183. What does LCD stand for?
    (1) Light Crystal Display
    (2) Liquid Computer Display
    (3) Liquid Crystal Display
    (4) Logic Control Display
    (5) Light Controlled Display
    Answer: (3) Liquid Crystal Display

184. LED is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Light Emitting Device
    (2) Light Emitting Diode
    (3) Light Electronic Display
    (4) Logic Emitting Diode
    (5) Local Electronic Display
    Answer: (2) Light Emitting Diode

185. What is the full form of LPI?
    (1) Lines Per Interface
    (2) Logic Per Inch
    (3) Lines Per Inch
    (4) Local Program Instruction
    (5) Laser Printer Interface
    Answer: (3) Lines Per Inch

186. LSI stands for what?
    (1) Large Scale Information
    (2) Large System Integration
    (3) Large Scale Integration
    (4) Local System Interface
    (5) Logic System Integration
    Answer: (3) Large Scale Integration

187. What does MAN stand for?
    (1) Mobile Area Network
    (2) Metropolitan Area Network
    (3) Main Access Network
    (4) Managed Area Network
    (5) Multi-Area Network
    Answer: (2) Metropolitan Area Network

188. MIPS is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Millions In-line Processed Seconds
    (2) Million Instructions Per Second
    (3) Micro-Instruction Per System
    (4) Magnetic Image Processing System
    (5) Memory Intensive Processing Speed
    Answer: (2) Million Instructions Per Second

189. What is the full form of MICR?
    (1) Magnetic Image Character Reader
    (2) Memory Input Character Recognition
    (3) Magnetic Ink Character Recognition
    (4) Microchip Identification Card Reader
    (5) Manual Ink Code Recognition
    Answer: (3) Magnetic Ink Character Recognition

190. MPEG stands for what?
    (1) Motion Picture Encoding Group
    (2) Multimedia Picture Experts Group
    (3) Motion Picture Experts Group
    (4) Media Processing Expert Group
    (5) Mobile Picture Encoding Group
    Answer: (3) Motion Picture Experts Group

191. What does MMS stand for?
    (1) Mobile Message System
    (2) Multimedia Message Service
    (3) Multi-Media System
    (4) Mobile Mail Service
    (5) Memory Management System
    Answer: (2) Multimedia Message Service

192. NAT is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Network Access Translation
    (2) Network Address Translation
    (3) National Area Test
    (4) Network Analysis Tool
    (5) Natural Address Type
    Answer: (2) Network Address Translation

193. What is the full form of NIC?
    (1) Network Interface Card
    (2) Network Integration Controller
    (3) Node Information Card
    (4) Numeric Interface Card
    (5) Network Internet Connection
    Answer: (1) Network Interface Card

194. NTP stands for what?
    (1) Network Traffic Protocol
    (2) Network Time Protocol
    (3) Node Transfer Protocol
    (4) New Technology Protocol
    (5) Network Topology Protocol
    Answer: (2) Network Time Protocol

195. What does OMR stand for?
    (1) Optical Mark Reader
    (2) Online Message Reader
    (3) Optical Media Recording
    (4) Object Markup Recognition
    (5) Offline Mail Reader
    Answer: (1) Optical Mark Reader

196. OSI is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Open System Interface
    (2) Open Systems Interconnection
    (3) Optical System Integration
    (4) Operating System Information
    (5) Online Service Interconnect
    Answer: (2) Open Systems Interconnection

197. What is the full form of OSS?
    (1) Open System Software
    (2) Open Source Software
    (3) Operating System Services
    (4) Online System Support
    (5) Object Storage System
    Answer: (2) Open Source Software

198. OOP stands for what?
    (1) Object-Oriented Processing
    (2) Open Object Programming
    (3) Object Oriented Programming
    (4) Online Operation Protocol
    (5) Output Oriented Program
    Answer: (3) Object Oriented Programming

199. What does OCR stand for?
    (1) Optical Code Recognition
    (2) Optical Character Recognition
    (3) Online Character Reader
    (4) Object Code Reader
    (5) Output Character Recognition
    Answer: (2) Optical Character Recognition

200. PAN is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Public Area Network
    (2) Personal Area Network
    (3) Permanent Access Network
    (4) Private Area Network
    (5) Primary Area Network
    Answer: (2) Personal Area Network

201. What is the full form of PDA?
    (1) Personal Data Assistant
    (2) Portable Digital Assistant
    (3) Programmed Digital Access
    (4) Personal Device Appliance
    (5) Public Data Access
    Answer: (2) Personal Digital Assistant

202. PDF stands for what?
    (1) Portable Document File
    (2) Printable Document Format
    (3) Portable Document Format
    (4) Program Document File
    (5) Page Description Format
    Answer: (3) Portable Document Format

203. What does PHP stand for?
    (1) Personal Home Page
    (2) Public Hosting Platform
    (3) Hypertext Pre-processor
    (4) Programming Home Page
    (5) Portable Hypertext Page
    Answer: (3) Hypertext Pre-processor

204. PNG is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Portable Network Graphics
    (2) Picture Network Group
    (3) Personal Network Gateway
    (4) Portable New Graphics
    (5) Pixel Network Graphics
    Answer: (1) Portable Network Graphics

205. What is the full form of PPM?
    (1) Pages Per Memory
    (2) Pixels Per Minute
    (3) Program Per Minute
    (4) Pages Per Minute
    (5) Processing Per Minute
    Answer: (4) Pages Per Minute

206. PROM stands for what?
    (1) Programmable Read Only Memory
    (2) Permanent Read Only Memory
    (3) Programmed Random Only Memory
    (4) Portable Read Only Module
    (5) Primary Read Only Memory
    Answer: (1) Programmable Read Only Memory

207. What does PCB stand for?
    (1) Primary Control Board
    (2) Printed Circuit Board
    (3) Program Control Block
    (4) Peripheral Connection Bus
    (5) Power Circuit Board
    Answer: (2) Printed Circuit Board

208. PIN is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Personal Identification Number
    (2) Program Identification Number
    (3) Private Information Number
    (4) Personal Interface Number
    (5) Packet Identification Number
    Answer: (1) Personal Identification Number

209. What is the full form of POS?
    (1) Permanent Online Storage
    (2) Point Of Sale
    (3) Power On System
    (4) Program Operating System
    (5) Portable Operating System
    Answer: (2) Point Of Sale

210. PPP stands for what?
    (1) Packet Processing Protocol
    (2) Point-to-Point Protocol
    (3) Public Personal Protocol
    (4) Peer-to-Peer Protocol
    (5) Private Packet Protocol
    Answer: (2) Point-to-Point Protocol

211. What does PSTN stand for?
    (1) Private Switched Telephone Network
    (2) Public Switched Telephone Network
    (3) Packet Switched Transmission Network
    (4) Personal Switched Telephone Network
    (5) Programmed System Telephone Network
    Answer: (2) Public Switched Telephone Network

212. POST is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Power On Self Test
    (2) Program On System Test
    (3) Peripheral Operating Self Test
    (4) Power Output System Test
    (5) Permanent Operating System Test
    Answer: (1) Power On Self Test

213. What is the full form of PING?
    (1) Packet Internet Gopher
    (2) Program Internet Gateway
    (3) Packet Inspection Network Gateway
    (4) Process Information Network Generator
    (5) Permanent Internet Navigator Gateway
    Answer: (1) Packet Internet Gopher

214. PSU stands for what?
    (1) Primary System Unit
    (2) Power Supply Unit
    (3) Programmed System Utility
    (4) Personal Storage Unit
    (5) Packet Switching Unit
    Answer: (2) Power Supply Unit

215. What does RAM stand for?
    (1) Random Access Memory
    (2) Read Access Module
    (3) Remote Access Memory
    (4) Rapid Access Memory
    (5) Read-only Access Memory
    Answer: (1) Random Access Memory

216. ROM is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Random Only Memory
    (2) Read Only Memory
    (3) Remote Operating Module
    (4) Record Only Memory
    (5) Routing Operations Module
    Answer: (2) Read Only Memory

217. What is the full form of RIP?
    (1) Routing Information Protocol
    (2) Remote Information Protocol
    (3) Read Interface Protocol
    (4) Random Information Processing
    (5) Resource Integration Protocol
    Answer: (1) Routing Information Protocol

218. RPM stands for what?
    (1) Reads Per Minute
    (2) Revolutions Per Minute
    (3) Rotations Per Module
    (4) Remote Processing Module
    (5) Random Program Memory
    Answer: (2) Revolutions Per Minute

219. What does RDMS stand for?
    (1) Random Data Management System
    (2) Relational Data Base Management System
    (3) Remote Database Management System
    (4) Rapid Data Management System
    (5) Real-time Data Management System
    Answer: (2) Relational Data Base Management System

220. RARP is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Reverse Address Resolution Protocol
    (2) Remote Access Routing Protocol
    (3) Read Access Resource Protocol
    (4) Reverse Application Request Protocol
    (5) Random Access Routing Procedure
    Answer: (1) Reverse Address Resolution Protocol

221. What is the full form of SAN?
    (1) System Area Network
    (2) Storage Area Network
    (3) Secure Access Network
    (4) Server Access Network
    (5) Standard Area Network
    Answer: (2) Storage Area Network

222. SDRAM stands for what?
    (1) Static Dynamic Random Access Memory
    (2) Synchronous Dynamic Random Access Memory
    (3) Serial Dynamic Random Access Memory
    (4) System Dynamic Random Access Memory
    (5) Secure Dynamic Random Access Memory
    Answer: (2) Synchronous Dynamic Random Access Memory

223. What does SIM stand for?
    (1) Subscriber Information Module
    (2) System Identity Module
    (3) Subscriber Identity Module
    (4) Secure Identity Module
    (5) Standard Information Module
    Answer: (3) Subscriber Identity Module

224. SIMM is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) System In-line Memory Module
    (2) Single Information Memory Module
    (3) Single In-line Memory Module
    (4) Serial Input Memory Module
    (5) Standard In-line Memory Module
    Answer: (3) Single In-line Memory Module

225. What is the full form of SIU?
    (1) System Interface Unit
    (2) Serial Interface Unit
    (3) Storage Interface Unit
    (4) Security Interface Unit
    (5) Signal Input Unit
    Answer: (2) Serial Interface Unit

226. SMPS stands for what?
    (1) Standard Mode Power Supply
    (2) Switch Mode Power Supply
    (3) System Management Power Supply
    (4) Secure Mode Power Supply
    (5) Switched Multiple Power Source
    Answer: (2) Switch Mode Power Supply

227. What does SMS stand for?
    (1) Short Mail Service
    (2) Simple Message Service
    (3) Short Message System
    (4) Short Message Service
    (5) Standard Message Service
    Answer: (4) Short Message Service

228. SMTP is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Switched Mail Transmitting Protocol
    (2) Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
    (3) Standard Message Transfer Protocol
    (4) Simple Message Telegramming Protocol
    (5) Switched Mode Technology Protocol
    Answer: (2) Simple Mail Transfer Protocol

229. What is the full form of SNAP?
    (1) System Network Access Protocol
    (2) Sub Network Access Protocol
    (3) Standard Network Application Protocol
    (4) Simple Network Access Procedure
    (5) Secure Network Access Protocol
    Answer: (2) Sub Network Access Protocol

230. SNMP stands for what?
    (1) Simple Network Management Protocol
    (2) Secure Network Monitoring Protocol
    (3) System Network Management Protocol
    (4) Standard Network Management Process
    (5) Service Network Monitoring Protocol
    Answer: (1) Simple Network Management Protocol

231. What does SQL stand for?
    (1) Standard Query Language
    (2) Structured Query Language
    (3) Simple Query Language
    (4) System Query Logic
    (5) Sequential Query Language
    Answer: (2) Structured Query Language

232. SRAM is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Static Read Access Memory
    (2) System Random Access Memory
    (3) Static Random Access Memory
    (4) Synchronous Random Access Memory
    (5) Secure Random Access Memory
    Answer: (3) Static Random Access Memory

233. What is the full form of TCP?
    (1) Transfer Control Protocol
    (2) Transmission Control Program
    (3) Transmission Control Protocol
    (4) Terminal Control Protocol
    (5) Transport Control Protocol
    Answer: (3) Transmission Control Protocol

234. TBPS stands for what?
    (1) Tera Bits Per Second
    (2) Tera Bytes Per Second
    (3) Terabyte Processing Speed
    (4) Total Bits Per System
    (5) Transfer Bytes Per Second
    Answer: (2) Tera Bytes Per Second

235. What does TIPS stand for?
    (1) Total Instructions Per System
    (2) Trillion Instruction Per Second
    (3) Transfer Instructions Per Second
    (4) Technical Information Processing System
    (5) Traversal Instruction Per System
    Answer: (2) Trillion Instruction Per Second

236. UNIAC is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Universal Network Interface Automatic Computer
    (2) Universal Numerical Integrator Automatic Computer
    (3) Universal Automatic Computer
    (4) Unified Automatic Computing
    (5) Unique Numerical Interface Automated Computer
    Answer: (3) Universal Automatic Computer

237. What is the full form of UPS?
    (1) Universal Power Supply
    (2) Uninterruptible Power System
    (3) Uninterruptible Power Supply
    (4) Unified Power Source
    (5) Utility Power System
    Answer: (3) Uninterruptible Power Supply

238. URL stands for what?
    (1) Uniform Resource Link
    (2) Universal Resource Locator
    (3) Uniform Resource Locator
    (4) Unified Resource Link
    (5) Universal Resource Linkage
    Answer: (3) Uniform Resource Locator

239. What does USB stand for?
    (1) Universal Serial Bus
    (2) Unified System Bus
    (3) Universal Standard Bus
    (4) Utility Serial Bus
    (5) Universal System Buffer
    Answer: (1) Universal Serial Bus

240. ULSI is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Universal Large-Scale Integration
    (2) Ultra Large-Scale Integration
    (3) Unified Large-Scale Integration
    (4) Ultra Logic System Integration
    (5) Universal Local System Integration
    Answer: (2) Ultra Large-Scale Integration

241. What is the full form of VAN?
    (1) Virtual Access Network
    (2) Value Added Network
    (3) Visual Area Network
    (4) Voice Area Network
    (5) Versatile Access Network
    Answer: (2) Value Added Network

242. VGA stands for what?
    (1) Video Graphics Adapter
    (2) Visual Graphics Array
    (3) Video Graphics Array
    (4) Versatile Graphics Adapter
    (5) Virtual Graphics Access
    Answer: (3) Video Graphics Array

243. What does VDU stand for?
    (1) Video Display Unit
    (2) Visual Data Unit
    (3) Virtual Display Utility
    (4) Voice Data Unit
    (5) Video Driven Unit
    Answer: (1) Visual Display Unit

244. VIRUS is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Virtual Information Resource Under Seizure
    (2) Vital Information Resource Under Seized
    (3) Volatile Information Resource Under System
    (4) Video Information Retrieval Under System
    (5) Visualized Information Resource Under Security
    Answer: (2) Vital Information Resource Under Seized

245. What is the full form of VCD?
    (1) Video Computer Disc
    (2) Virtual Compact Disc
    (3) Video Compact Disk
    (4) Visual Computer Disk
    (5) Voice Compact Disc
    Answer: (3) Video Compact Disk

246. VOIP stands for what?
    (1) Video Over Internet Protocol
    (2) Voice Over Internet Protocol
    (3) Virtual Office Internet Protocol
    (4) Visual Over IP
    (5) Voice Operating Internet Protocol
    Answer: (2) Voice Over Internet Protocol

247. What does VPN stand for?
    (1) Virtual Private Network
    (2) Visual Private Network
    (3) Voice Protocol Network
    (4) Virtual Public Network
    (5) Video Private Network
    Answer: (1) Virtual Private Network

248. WAN is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Wireless Area Network
    (2) Wide Area Network
    (3) Web Area Network
    (4) Wired Access Network
    (5) World Area Network
    Answer: (2) Wide Area Network

249. What is the full form of WAP?
    (1) Wireless Access Point
    (2) Web Application Protocol
    (3) Wireless Application Protocol
    (4) Wide Area Protocol
    (5) Web Access Protocol
    Answer: (3) Wireless Application Protocol

250. WIFI stands for what?
    (1) Wireless Feature
    (2) Wireless Internet Fidelity
    (3) Wireless Fidelity
    (4) Wide Fidelity
    (5) Wireless Interconnection Feature
    Answer: (3) Wireless fidelity

251. What does WMV stand for?
    (1) Web Media Video
    (2) Wireless Media Video
    (3) Windows Mobile Video
    (4) Windows Media Video
    (5) Wideband Multimedia Video
    Answer: (4) Windows Media Video

252. WPM is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Words Per Memory
    (2) Wireless Protocol Module
    (3) Words Per Minute
    (4) Write Per Minute
    (5) Web Page Management
    Answer: (3) Words Per Minute

253. What is the full form of WORM?
    (1) Write Once Read Many
    (2) Wireless Optical Read Memory
    (3) Write On Random Memory
    (4) Web Oriented Read Memory
    (5) Wide Optical Read Module
    Answer: (1) Write Once Read Many

254. XML stands for what?
    (1) Extended Markup Language
    (2) Extensible Mark-up Language
    (3) eXtreme Markup Language
    (4) Cross-platform Markup Language
    (5) XHTML Markup Language
    Answer: (2) Extensible Mark-up Language

255. What does XMF stand for?
    (1) eXtended Media File
    (2) Extensible Music File
    (3) XML Media Format
    (4) Cross-platform Music Format
    (5) eXtensible Multimedia Format
    Answer: (2) Extensible Music File

256. XHTML is the abbreviation for what?
    (1) Extensible Hyper Text Mark-up Language
    (2) eXtended Hypertext Transfer Markup Language
    (3) XML Hypertext Markup Language
    (4) Cross-platform Hypertext Markup Language
    (5) Extra Hyper Text Markup Language
    Answer: (1) Extensible Hyper Text Mark-up Language

257. What is the Full form of SMTP in Computer aspects?
    (1) Switched Mail Transmitting Protocol
    (2) Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
    (3) Standard Message Transfer Protocol
    (4) Simple Message Telegramming Protocol
    (5) Switched Mode Technology Protocol
    Answer: (2) Simple Mail Transfer Protocol

258. What does JAR stand for?
    (1) Jumper
    (2) Java Application Resource
    (3) Java Arsenal
    (4) Java Virtual Machine
    (5) Java Archive
    Answer: (5) Java Archive

259. What is SMTP defined as in the solution?
    (1) A program for receiving emails.
    (2) A set of communication guidelines that allow software to transmit an electronic mail over the internet.
    (3) A protocol for secure email encryption.
    (4) A system for filtering spam.
    (5) A database for email addresses.
    Answer: (2) A set of communication guidelines that allow software to transmit an electronic mail over the internet.

260. For what is SMTP used?
    (1) Browse the internet.
    (2) Sending messages to other computer users based on e-mail addresses.
    (3) Creating web pages.
    (4) Managing network connections.
    (5) Downloading files.
    Answer: (2) Sending messages to other computer users based on e-mail addresses.

261. What is a JAR file described as in the solution?
    (1) A single class file.
    (2) A zip-file which contains a couple of class files and a text file containing some meta information.
    (3) An executable program only.
    (4) A security certificate.
    (5) A database backup.
    Answer: (2) A zip-file which contains a couple of class files and a text file containing some meta information.

262. For what purpose can JAR files be used?
    (1) Only to store text documents.
    (2) To bundle a Java library containing many classes into a single file or to bundle a Java application into a so-called executable JAR file.
    (3) Only for web development.
    (4) Only for network configuration.
    (5) Only for database management.
    Answer: (2) To bundle a Java library containing many classes into a single file or to bundle a Java application into a so-called executable JAR file.