GENERAL KNOWLEDGE



###HISTORY###
ANCIENT INDIA
SOURCES OF ANCIENT INDIAN HISTORY
1. Literary Sources : Vedic, Sanskrit, Pali, Prakrit and other literature and
foreign accounts.
2. Archaeological : epigraphic, numismatic and architectural remains,
archaeological explorations and excavations
❖ study of development of scripts: palaeography.
❖ study of inscriptions:epigraphy.
❖ study of coins: numismatics
❖ study of monuments, material remains: Archeology.
LITERARY SOURCES
Indian Tradition of History Writing
Puranic Literature
● The Puranic literature is very vast. 18 main Puranas, 18 subsidiary Puranas
and a large number of other books. According to the Puranas, following are
the subject matters of history :
● The two great epics, the Ramayana and the Mahabharata, may also be used
as a source. It is generally held that there have been constant interpolations in
these works.
Vedic Literature
● The Four Vedas : We cannot find much trace of political history in the
Vedas, but can have reliable glimpses of the culture and civilization of the
Vedic period.
Sutra
● Each vedanga has developed a credible literature around it which are in the
sutra form i.e., precepts.
● This is a very precise and exact form of expression in prose which was
developed by the ancient Indians.
Later Vedic Literature
Brahmanas elaborate on vedic rituals Aranyakas give discourses on different
spiritual and philosophical problems.



Upanishads — Sulvasutra prescribe measurements for sacrificial altars. Mark
the beginning of study of geometry and maths.
Srautasutra account of royal coronation ceremonies Grihyasutra domestic
rituals with birth, naming, marriage, funeral etc.
Jain and Buddhist Literature
literature written in notes Jain Prakrit was a form of Sanskrit language
Buddhist Pali as the form of Prakrit language which was in vogue in
Magadha/South Bihar. Ashokan edicts are also in this language.
Kautilya’s Arthashastra
● A book on statecraft was written in the Maurya period.
● The text is divided into 15 chapters known as books.
●  Different books deal with different subject matter concerning polity,
economy and society.
● Mudrarakshusha, a play written by Vishakhadatta, also gives a glimpse of
society and culture.
Notable writers
Kalidasa: Malavikagnimitram is based on some events of the reign of
Pusyamitra Sunga, dynasty which followed the Mauryas.
Abhgyanshakuntalam: glimpse of Guptas.
Bhasa and Sudraka: written plays based on historical events.
Banabhatta: Harshacharita throws light on many historical facts
Vakpati: wrote Gaudauaho, based on the exploits of Yasovarman of Kanauj
Bilhana: Vikramankadevachnrita describes the victories of the later Chalukya
king Vikramaditya.
Kalhana: His book Rajatarangini.
FOREIGN ACCOUNTS
Greek Ambassadors :
● Ambassadors were sent to Pataliputra by Greek kings.
● Notable: Megasthenese, Deimachus and Dionysios.
Megasthenese :
● The Greek ambassador (in the court of Chandragupta Maurya c. 324- 300
B.C.)
● Megasthenese wrote extensively in a book called Indika which is no longer
available to us.
●  These fragments of Indika, provide valuable information on Maurya
Administration, social classes and economic activities.



Chinese Travelers
● visited India from time to time- as Buddhist pilgrims and therefore their
accounts are somewhat tilted towards Buddhism. Three important pilgrims
were
Notable Chinese writers
Fa-Hien visited India in fifth century A.D. Describes social-religious and
economic conditions of India in the time of Guptas.

Hiuen-Tsang visited in 7th Century In the age of Harshavardhana and some
other contemporary kings of Northern India.

I-tsing visited in 7th Century
Arab Historian: Al-Beruni
● Abu Rihan better known as Al-Beruni.
●  Born in central Asia in A.D. 973 and died in Ghazni (present-day
Afghanistan) in A.D.1048
● Contemporary of Mahmud of Ghazni.
●  When Mahmud conquered part of central Asia, he took Al-Beruni with
him.
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOURCES
Megaliths :
●  Some people in South India, buried their dead with tools, weapons,
potteries etc. Such graves were encircled by a big piece of stone. These
structures are called Megaliths.
Inscriptions
● The earliest system of writings is found in the Harappan seals. (2500BC)
However, there has been no success in deciphering it. They are pictographic
script- ideas/objects expressed in form of picture.
● Thus, the writing system of the Ashokan inscriptions (in Brahmi script) are

considered to be the earliest (3rd AD).

COINS/NUMISMATICS
● We could not have known about most of the Indo Greek, Saka-Parthian
and Kushana kings without numismatic sources.



● Some coins were issued by merchants and guilds with permission of rulers
prove that commerce had became important in later history of Ancient India.
● Largest number of coins found in post-Maurya period trade had increased.
Punch-Marked Coins are the earliest coins of India and they bear only
symbols on them.
● Each symbol is punched separately, which sometimes overlap the another.
Indo-Greek
● silver and copper and rarely in gold.
Kushanas
● Kushanas issued mostly gold coins and numerous copper coins which are
found in most parts of north India up to Bihar.
● Indian influence can be seen on them from the very beginning. We find
many Indian gods and goddesses depicted on Kushana coins besides many
Persian and Greek deities.
Guptas
● issued largest number of Gold coins.
●  Guptas appear to have succeeded Kushanas in the tradition of minting
coins. They completely Indianised their coinage
● kings are depicted engaged in activities like hunting a lion or rhinoceros,
holding a bow or battle-axes, playing musical instrument or performing
Ashwamedh yajna.
Excavations
●  In addition to epigraphic and numismatic sources there are many other
antiquarian remains which speak much about our past.
● Temples and sculptures are found all over the country right from the Gupta
period upto recent times. They excavated large caves in the hills in Western
India which are mostly Chaitya and viharas.
PRE-HISTORIC PERIOD
● The Pre-historic phase can be roughly divided into 3 parts i.e., paleolithic,
Mesolithic and Neolithic.
PALEOLITHIC AGE (250,000-10,000 B.C.)
● Paleolithic Culture developed in the Pleistocene period.
● Pleistocene was the period when ice covered the earth’s surface. The main
tools used during this period are handaxes, cleavers, Choppers, flakes,
burins, scrapers. Their tools were made up of hard rock called ‘quartzite’.



● The paleolithic sites are spread in practically all parts of India except the
alluvial plains of the Indus and Ganga.
●  The people of this age lived on hunting and gathering wild fruits and
vegetables.
● Man during this period used tools of unpolished, undressed rough stones
and lived in cave rock shelters. They had no knowledge of agriculture, fire,
or pottery of any metal.
● In the later Paleolithic phase domestication of animals was practiced.
● Homo sapiens first appeared in the last of this phase. It has been pointed out
that Paleolithic men belonged to the Negrito race.
MESOLITHIC AGE (10,000-6,000 B.C.)
● The Mesolithic Age began around 8000 B.C. It was the transitional phase
between the Paleolithic Age and the Neolithic Age
●  Blade, Core, Point, Triangle, Lunate and Trapeze are the main types of
Mesolithic tools (microliths).
● Important sites of Mesolithic Age are Bagor, Langhraj, Sarai Nahar Rai,
and Birbhanpur. Sites like Bhimbetka, Adamgarh and Mirzapur are rich in
Mesolithic Art.
NEOLITHIC AGE (6000-2500 B.C.)
● The term ‘Neolithic’ was coined by Sir John Lubbock in his book ‘Pre
Histroic Times’.
● Neolithic men cultivated land and grew fruits and corn like ragi and horse
gram. They domesticated cattle, sheep and goat.
●  Important sites are Gufkaral, Burzahom, Chirand, Mehargarh, Piklihal.
Chopani Mando provides the earliest evidence of the use of pottery in the
World.
STONE - COPPER PHASE
● This phase is also called as chalcolithic phase. It is charaterised by the use
of stone and copper.
● Chalcolithic people were not acquainted with burnt brick.
● People used different types of Pottery of which Black and Red ware was
most popular.
● They worshipped Mother Goddess and Bull.
● They generally lived in thatched houses.
HARAPPAN CIVILISATION



Manda (Kashmir) Daimabad (Maharashtra) Alamgirpur (Uttar Pradesh)
Sutkagendor (Pakistan)
●  According to Radio Carbon dating Harappan civilization developed
between 2500 B.C. to 1750 B.C.
● Indus Civilization is also called as Harappan Civilization because the first
excavated site is Harappa. It belongs to the Bronze Age. It extended from
Manda (Jammu) in North to Daimabad in South.
● Major Settlements are in the Ghaggar-Hakra belt. Rakhigarhi is the latest
site discovered in India. Two big mounds of Harappan sites found at
Rakhigarhi in Hisar district of Haryana in January 2014. It has led to
archaeologists establishing it as the biggest Harappan civilization site.
● Copper, bronze, silver, gold were known but not iron.
●  Seals were made up of steatite . Majority of the seals have an animal
engraved on it with a short inscription. The most frequently found animal is
unicorn bull.
● They worshipped, Proto-Shiva, Mother-Goddess, Bull, and Pipal tree.
● Harappan civilization was the first urban civilization.
● Their Pottery was red or black Pottery
● The script was pictographic. The writing was Boustrophedon.
● Mohenjodaro a Sindhi word meaning “Mound of the dead.”
● Indus people were the first to produce cotton in the world.

Site : Important Archaeological Findings
Harappa : Stone symbols of Lingam (male sex organ) and Yoni (female sex
organ), Painted pottery, Clay figures of Mother Goddess, Wheat and Barley
in wooden mortar, Copper scale, Crucible for bronze, Copper-made mirror,
Vanity box, Dice. 6 Granaries in row, Working floors, Workmen’s quarters,
Virgin-Goddess (seal), Cemetery (R-37, H).
Mohenjodaro : Great Bath, Great Granery (the largest build ing of
civilization), Assembly hall, Shell strips, Pashupati Mahadeva/ Proto-Shiva
(seal), Bronze Image of a nude woman dancer, Steatite image of bearded
man, Human skeletons huddled together, The evidence of an Indian ship
(figured on a seal). Painted seal (Demi-God), Clay figures of Mother
Goddess, A fragment of woven cotton, Brick Kilns, 2 Mesopotamian seals,
1398 seals (57% of total seals of Harappan civilization), Dice.
Chanhudaro : City without a citadel, Inkpot, Lipstick; Metal-workers’,
shell-ornament makers’ and bead-makers’ shops; Imprint of dog’s paw on a



brick, Terracotta model of a bullock cart, Bronze toy cart.
Lothal : Dockyard, Rice husk; Metal-workers’, shell-ornament makers’ and
bead-makers’ shopes; Fire altars, Terracotta figurine of a horse, Double
burial (burying a male and a female in a single grave), Terracotta model of a
ship, Dying vat, Persian / Iranian seal, Baharainean seal, Painted jar (bird and
fox).
Kalibanga : Ploughed field surface (Pre-Harappan), 7 Fire altars, Decorated
bricks, Wheels of a toy cart, Mesopotamian cylindrical seal.
Banawali : Lack of chess-board or gridiron pattern town planning, Lack of
systematic drainage system, Toy plough, Clay figures of Mother Goddess.
Dholavira : A unique water harnessing system and its storm water drainage
system, a large “well and a bath (giant water reservoirs), Only site to be
divided into 3 parts, Largest Harappan inscription used for civic purposes, A
stadium.
Surkotada : Bones of horse, Oval grave, Pot burials.
Daimabad : Bronze images (Charioteer with chariot, ox, elephant and
rhinoceros)
IMPORTANT HARAPPAN SITES

Site Excavator Present Position
Harappa Dayaram Shahani (1921) Montogomery (Punjab)

Pakistan
Mohenjodaro Rakhal Das Banerjee (1922) Sindh (Pakistan)
Kalibanga Amlananda Ghosh, Hanumangarh

 B. B. Lal (Rajasthan)

Lothal S. R. Rao (1957) Ahmedabad (Gujarat)
Banwali R. S. Bist (1973) Hissar (Haryana)
Rangpur M. S. Vatsa (1931) Gujarat (near Madar river)
Ropar Y. D. Sharma (1955-56) Punjab (Sutlej Bank)
Alamgirpur Y. D. Sharma Meerut (Hindon river)
Sutkagendor A. Stein, George Dales Baluchistan (Dashak river)
Surkotada J. P. Joshi (1964) Gujarat (Kuchchh Plain)



Dabarkot Macay (1935) Baluchistan
Chanhudaro N. G. Majumdar (1931) Sindh (Pakistan)
Ali Murad K. M. Kazzak Sindh (Pakistan)
Mitathal Punjab University Bhiwani
Rakhi Garhi Suraj Bhan Jind (Haryana)
Sutkakoh Dales (1962) 8 km from Penn
Manda Jagpati Joshi Akhnur
 
TOWNS NEAR RIVER BANKS

Towns Rivers Towns Rivers
Mohenjodaro Indus Kalibanga Ghagghar
Banwali Ghagghar Rojdi Bhadar
Lothal Bhogava Sutkakoh Shadi Kaur
Malavan Tapti Chanhudaro Indus
Sutkagendor Dashak Alamgirpur Hindon
Bhagtrav Kissagar Kot Diji Indus

confluence
Rangpur Bhadar Harappa Ravi
 
THE EARLY VEDIC PERIOD (1500-1000 B.C.) It is also known as Rig
Vedic Age. Rig Vedic Age gives us knowledge about the Aryans they were
come in India from central Asia (Steppe region)
● The earliest Aryans lived in the land of ‘Sapta Sindhava’ i.e., land of Seven
rivers. The early vedic society was Pastoral.
●  Cattle was the chief measure of wealth and wealthy man was called
‘Gomat’.
● The Raja or chief is called ‘Gopati’. In the Rigveda Godhuli is used as a
term for a measure of time.
● Apart from Yava or Barley, no other grain is mentioned



● Indra was the greatest God of Aryans Agni occupied the second position.
Varuna occupied the third position and he personfied water.
●  The Battle of Ten Kings ended with the victory of the Bharatas led by
Sudas.
●  Widow marriage and Niyoga prevailed in the society. Important
functionaries were Purohita, Senani, and gramini
● Important tribal Assemblies were Sabha, Samiti, Vidath and Gana.
●  Sabha performed judicial and administrative functions. King attended
Sabha but was not elected by it. Samiti is mentioned nine–times in Rigveda.
Samiti was presided over by king. King was elected in Samiti.
● ‘Gana’ is mentioned for 46 places in Rigveda. Leader of Gana was called
as ‘Ganapati’.
● Dasyus were the most bitter enemies of the Rigvedic people.
● Rigvedic people were not aware of Iron.
● Agni was called as Bhuvanchakshu.
● Gayatri Mantra is mentioned in IIIrd Mandal of Rigveda.
● Asvins and Nasatyas were divine physicians. Yama was the Lord of the
dead. Aditi is the mother of Surya. Varuna bears the title ‘Asura’.
● River Indus was the most important river in Vedic period.
● River Sarswati was the most sacred river in Vedic period.
THE LATER VEDIC PERIOD (1000-600 B.C.)
● The period assigned to later Vedic phase is 1000 B.C. to 600 B.C. These
communities used a particular kind of pottery called the Painted Grey Ware
(PGW).
● Iron objects are common to most PGW sites. This metal was introduced
around 1000-800 B.C. It is mentioned as Ayas.
● Society was clearly divided into four Varnas namely–Brahmin, Kshatriya,
Vaishya and Sudras.
● The upper three classes were known as Dvij (twice born).
● Gotra first appeared in Atharvaveda with the meaning of clan. There was
practice of class exogamy.
●  There was reference to sati but not in common fashion. There were
instances of child marriage.
●  Indra and Agni lost their importance. Prajapati (the creator) became
supreme.



● Vishnu came to be conceived as the preserver and protector of the people.
Pushan became God of Shudras. Sacrifices became more important and
elaborate. There were 33 deities during later Vedic period.
●  The king’s influence was strengthened by rituals. Rajasuya conferred
supreme power on king. Chariot racing was the main sport and gambling was
the main pastime.
●  Vajapeya was a drink of strength. Aswamedha was the horse sacrifice.
Kings were known with different names in different region.
●  Eastern Kings were called Samrat. Western Kings were called Svarat.
Northern Kings were called Virat. Southern Kings were called Bhoja. Kings
of the middle country were called Raja.
●  Earliest evidence of medicine comes from Atharvaveda. Atharvaveda
mentions Sabha and Samiti as daughters of Prajapati.
● During later vedic period Prajapati came to occupy the Supreme position.
● Three roomed mud house has been discovered at Bhagwanpura. Largest
deposit of Iron weapon have been found at Atranjikhera. Two furnaces for
iron smelting have been found at Suneri village in Jhunjhunu district.
●  Eight forms of marriages are given in Ashvalahayan Grihyasutra.
Satapatha Brahamana says that ‘wife is half her husband’.
●  Women enjoyed freedom and respect but their status deteriorated
compared to the early vedic period.
● Earliest clear reference to the four ashrams is given in Jabala Upnishad.
THE VEDIC LITERATURE
● The word Veda is derived from the Sanskrit word ‘Vidi’ meaning, to know
or knowledge par excellence.
● Vedic texts are divided between Sruti (based on hearing), which is distinct
from Smriti (based on memory).
●  Four Vedas and their Samhitas, the Brahmanas, the Aranyakas and the
Upanishads form a class of literature known as Sruti.

RIG VEDA It is divided into 10 Books or Mandalas. Books II to VII are
considered the oldest. Book I, VIII and X seem to be later additions.
● A collection of 1028 hymns of a number of priestly families.
● Written between 1700-1500 B.C. when Aryans were still in Punjab.
● The IX mandala is dedicated exclusively to Soma.
● The singer of the Rig veda is called the Hotra.



● The X Mandala contains the famous Purushsukta hymn that explains the
origin of four Varnas.
● Gayatri Mantra is the most sacred hymn of Rig Veda. Mentioned in 3rd
mandal, written by Viswamitra.
YAJUR VEDA
●  A ritualistic Veda. It is divided into Shukla Yajurveda and Krishna
Yajurveda. Written in prose, it deals with procedure for performance of
sacrifices and contains rituals as well as hymns. The singer of the Yajur Veda
is called Ardhavayu.
SAMA VEDA
●  Sam Veda derives its roots from Saman, which means a melody. A
collection of melodies. A collection of 1603 hymns. Except 99, all other were
derived from Rig Veda. It contains the Dhrupada Raga. The singer of Sama
Veda is called Udgata.
ATHARVA VEDA
● A collection of 711 hymns, it is divided into 20 khandas. It is the latest
Veda. Atharva Veda is a book of magical formula medicinal treatises etc. It
contains charms and spell to ward off evil and disease. Its content throws
light on the practices of non-Aryans. In Atharvaveda, Sabha and Samiti are
described as uterine sisters–The two daughters of Prajapati. This veda is also
known as Brahma Veda.
Upanishadas
● The Upanishadas are philosphical texts. They are generally called Vedanta,
as they came towards the end of the Veda. There are 108 Upanishadas.
Vrihadaranyaka is the oldest Upanishada.
Literature of Vedic Tradition (600 BC-600 AD)
●  Literature of Vedic Tradition (Smriti i.e. rememberance literature)
comprises of 6 literary works :
1. Vedangas/Sutras 2. Smritis Dharmashastras 3. Mahakavyas (Epics) 4.
Puranas 5. Upvedas 6. Shad Dharshanas.
● There are six Vedangas :
(i) Shiksha (Phonetics): Tratishakhya’- the oldest text on phonetics.
(ii) Kalpa Sutras (Rituals) : (a) Shravta Sutras/Shulva Sutra – deal with the
sacrifices, (b) Grihya Sutras—deal with family ceremonies, (c) Dharma
Sutras—deal with Varnas, Ashramas etc.



(iii) Vyakarana (Grammar) : ‘Ashtadyayi’ (Panini) — oldest grammar of the
word.
(iv) Nirukta (Etymology) : ‘Nirukta’ (Yask) based on ‘Nighantu’ (Kashyap)
— a collection of difficult vedic words—(‘Nighantu’—the oldest
wordcollection of the-world; ‘Nirukta’—the oldest dictionary of the world).
(v) Chhanda (Metrics) : ‘Chhandasutras’ (Pingal)–famous text.
(vi) Jyotisha (Astronomy) ‘’Vedanga Jyotisha’ (Lagadh Muni – the oldest
Jyotisha text.
● There are six famous smritis :
(i) Manu Smriti (Pre-Gupta Period)— the oldest Smriti text; Commentators :
Vishwarupa, Meghatithi, Gobindraj, Kulluk Bhatt.
(ii) Yajnavalkya Smriti (Pre-Gupta Period)— Commentators : Vishwarupa,
Vijayaneshwar, Apararka (a king of Shilahar Dynasty)
(iii) Narad Smriti (Gupta period),
(iv) Parashara Smriti (Gupta period)
(v) Brihaspati Smriti Gupta period),
(vi) Katyayana Smriti (Gupta period).
● There are mainly two Mahakavyas (Epics) :
(i) The Ramayana (Valmiki) : It is known as ‘Adi Kavya’ (the oldest epic
of the world). At present, it consists of 24,000 shlokas i.e. verses (Originally
6,000, Later - 12,000, Finally - 24,000) in 7 Kandas i.e. sections. 1st and 7th
Kandas were the latest additions to the Ramayana.
(ii) The Mahabharata (Ved Vyasa) : The longest epic of the world. At
present, it consists of 1,00,000 shlokas i.e. verses (Originally–8,800- Jay
Samhita, Later-24,000–Chaturvinshati Sahastri Samhita/Bharata, Finally-
l,00,000-Shatasahastri Samhita/Maha Bharata) in 18 Parvans i.e. chapters,
plus the Harivamsa supplement. Bhagavad Gita is extracted from Bihshma
Parvan of Mahabharata. Shanti Parvan is the largest parvan (chapter) of the
Mahabarata.
● The Purana means ‘the old’. There are 18 famous ‘Puranas’. The Matsya
Purana is the oldest Puranic text. The other important Puranas are the
Bhagavata, the Vishnu, the Vayu and the Brahmanda. They describe
genealogies of various royal dynasties.
●  The Upavedas (the auxiliary vedas) were traditionally associated with
vedas :
Upavedas Associated with
1. Ayurveda i.e. Medicine Rig Veda



2. Gandharvaveda i.e. Music Sama Veda
3. Dhanurveda i.e. Archery Yajur Veda
4. Shilpveda/Arthaveda i.e. the science of Atharva Veda craft/wealth
(Vishwakarma)
There are 6 schools of Indian philosophy known as Shad-Darshanas.
Shaddarshanas

S.No. Darshana Founder Basic Text
1. Sankhya Darshana Kapila Sankhya Sutra
2. Yoga Darshana Patanjali Yoga Sutra
3. Nyaya Darshana Akshapada Nayaya Sutra

Gautama
4. Vaishesika Darshana Uluka Kanada Vaishesika Sutra
5. Miraansa/Purva Jaimini Purva Mimansa Sutra

Mimansa
6. Vedant/Uttara-Mimansa Badarayana Brahma Sutra/ Vedant

Sutra
Rigvedic Name Modern name Region

Sindhu Indus Punjab (Pakistan) & J&K
Vitasta Jhelum Punjab J&K
Asikani Chenab Punjab (Pakistan) & J&K
Vipas Beas Punjab
Parushni Ravi Punjab
Sutudri Sutlej Punjab
Saraswati Sarsuti Rajasthan
Drishadvati Ghaggar Rajasthan
Kubha Kabul Afghanistan
Suvastu Swati Afghanistan
Krumu Kurram Afghanistan
Gomati Gomal Afghanistan



SOME MORE ABOUT HINDUISM
Six Systems of Philosophy

Philosophy Founder Other Scholars
Sankhya Kapila Ishwar Krishna, Vachaspati
Nyaya Akshapada Gautma Vatsayayan, Udyanacharya,

Jayantbhatt
Yoga Patanjali Myas
Vaisheshika Uluka Kanada Keshav raishra, Vishvanath
Mimansa Jamini Sabrasvamin, Kumaril Bhatt
Vedanta Badrayana Shankaracharya, Vachaspati,

Ramanuj, Madhvacharya etc.
Religious-ideas and their founders

Religious ideas/sect Founder
1. Pasupatas Lakulisa/Nakulisa
2. Lingayats Basava
3. Pratyabhijna Vasugupta
4. Spanda-sastra Kallata and Samnanda
5. Siva-Siddhanata Srikanth-Sivacharya
6. Advait Shankaracharya
7. Vishistadvait Ramanujacharya
8. Brahm Sampradaya Madhvacharya
9. Sanak Sampradaya Nimbakacharya

RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS
SAIVISM
● The origin of Saivism can be traced back to the pre-vedic times. By the
early centuries of the Christian era it was a popular sect all over India. Siva
was the principle deity of this sect. Siva was worshipped in the form of
Linga.
● Tamil Sangam work refers to Siva as the greatest of all gods (mamudu
mudalvan).
● Siva’s consort Parvati was adored as Sakti. In Satavahana kindom Parvati
was worshipped as Gauri. In Tamil country Skanda was worshipped in the



Murugan form.
●  Ganesa was the younger brother of Skanda. Ganesa was also known as
Vinayak.
● The most popular Saiva sect was Pasupata sect.
● The Kapalika and Kalamukha sect developed much later.
VAISHNAVISM
● The principal deity of this sect was Vishnu.
●  The cult of Vishnu in the early period was known by the name
Bhagavatism. Bhagavatism owed its origin to the Upanishadas. Bhagavatism
arose around the Mathura region.
● Acharyas are the great leader philosophers of Vaishnavism who defended
and popularised the religion. Some of the prominent acharyas are :
Ramanuja, Chaitanya, Madhava, Nimbarka, Nathmuni, Yamunacharya. It was
developed and popularised in south by twelve saints known as Alvars.
Nammalvar and Tirumalsalvar were the greatest of twelve Alvars.
CHRISTIANITY
● This religion was founded by Jesus Christ. He was born to Mother Marry
and Joseph in Bethlehem near Jerusalem. His birth day (25th December) is
celebrated as the holy festival, Christmas.
● His first two disciple, Andrews and Peter, were hanged in AD 33 by the
Roman Governor Portius.
● Bible is the holy book of Christians and the sign of ‘cross’ is their holy
symbol.
ISLAM
● Hazrat Muhammad Saheb
founded the islamic religion. He was born to Amina (mother) and Abdullah
(father) at Mecca in AD 570.
● He was married to Khajida (a widow) at the age of 25 yrs. His daugher,
Fatima, was married to Ali Hussain.
● Hazrat Muhammad attained supreme knowledge or enlightment in AD 610
in the Hira Cave near Mecca. His teachings are compiled in the Holy Quran.
● 24th September AD 622, the day Hazrat Muhammad started his journey
from Mecca to Medina mark the beginning of Hijri Era
● He died on 8th June, AD 632 and was buried at Medina.



● After his death Islam divided into Shia and Sunni cult. His successors were
known as Khalifa. The Turkish ruler, Mushtafa Kamal Pasha, Kalifah
ended the designation of Caliphate 1924 A.D.
ZOROASTRIANISM (PARSI)
●  Parsi religion was founded by Prophet Zoroaster (Zarathustra). His
teachings compiled in the holybook, Zend Avesta. His followers believed in
one God, Ahur.
BUDDHISM
● Buddhism was founded by Gautama Buddha.
● Buddha was born on the Vaisakh Purnima day in 563 B.C.
● He belonged to the Sakya clan of Kshatriyas.
● His father was Suddhodana, the ruler of Kapilvastu.
● He was born in Lumbini in Kapilvastu.
● His mother was Mahamaya of the Kosala dynasty.
● Buddha got Nirvana at the age of 35 years.
● Buddha got Nirvana at Uruvela on the bank of river Niranjana.
● Buddha gave his first Sermon at Sarnath. Buddha’s first sermon is called as
“Dharma Chakraparivartana”
●  Buddha died in 483 B.C. at Kushinagar. Kushinagar has been identified
with village Kasia in Deoria district of U.P.
● Buddha’s last words were “All composite things, strive diligently”.
● Buddha was brought up by his stepmother Gautami.
●  After seeing an old man, a sick man, a corpse and an ascetic, Buddha
decided to become a wanderer.
●  Asvajit, Upali, Mogallana, Sariputra and Ananda were five disciples of
Buddha
Five Great Events of Buddha’s Life and their symbols
● Birth : Lotus and Bull
● Great Renunciation : Horse
● Nirvana : Bodhi tree
● First Sermon : Dharmachakra or wheel
● Parinirvana or Death : Stupa
Four Noble Truths
● The world is full of sorrows.
● Desire is root cause of sorrow.
● If desire is conquered, all sorrows can be removed.



● Desire can be removed by following the eight-fold path.
Eight Fold Path
(1) Right understanding (2) Right speech (3) Right livelihood (4) Right
mindfulness (5) Right thought (6) Right action (7) Right effort and (8) Right
concentration
Three Ratnas
● Buddha ● Dhamma ● Sangha
Code of Conduct :
(1) Do not covet the property of others
(2) Do not commit violence
(3) Do not speak a lie
(4) Do not indulge in corrupt practices
BUDDHIST COUNCILS
● The First Council was held in 483 BC at Saptaparni cave near Rajagriha
to compile the Dhamma Pitaka and Vinaya Pitaka.
Chairman : Mahakassapa, Patron : Ajatshatru
● The Second Council was held at Vaisali in 383 BC. The monks of Vaisali
wanted some change in the rites. Schism into Sthaviravadins and
Mahasanghikas.
Chairman : Sabakami, Patron : Kalashoka
● The Third Council was held at Pataliputra during the reign of Ashoka 236
years after the death of Buddha. It was held under the Presidentship of
Moggliputta Tissa to revise the scriptures.
● The Fourth Council was held during the reign of Kanishka in Kashmir
under the Presidentship of Vasumitra, who was helped by Aswvaghosha and
resulted in the division of Buddhists into Mahayanists and Hinayanists.
SECTS OF BUDDHISM
● Hinayana : (a) Its followers believed in the original teachings of Buddha
(b) They sought individual salvation through self-discipline and meditation.
(c) They did not believe in idolworship
(d) Hinayana, like Jainism, is a religion without God, Karma taking the place
of God
(e) Nirvana is regarded as the extinction of all
(f) the oldest school of Hinayana Buddhism is the Sthaviravada (Thervada in
Pali) or the ‘Doctrine of the Elders’



● Mahayana : (a) Its followers believed in the heavenliness of Buddha and
sought the salvation of all through the grace and help of Buddha and
Bodhisatvas.
(b) Believes in idolworship.
(c) Believes that Nirvana is not a negative cessation of misery but a positive
state of bliss.
● Vajrayana
(a) Its followers believed that salvation could be the best attained by
acquiring the magical power, which they called Vajra.
(b) The chief divinties of this new sect were the Taras.
(c) It became popular in Eastern India, particularly Bengal and Bihar.
S. No. Buddhist Location Founder

Imoversotoes
1. Nalanda Badagoan, Bihar Kumargupta-I
2. Vikramshila Bhagalpur, Bihar Dharmapala (Pala ruler)
3. Somapuri North Bengal Dharmapala (Pala ruler)
4. Jagadal Bengal Ramapala (Pala ruler)
5. Odantpuri Bihar Sharit, Bihar Gopala (Pala ruler)
6. Vallabhi Gujarat Bhattarka (Maitrak Rule)
 
BUDDHIST LITERATURE
● The Buddhist scriptures in Pali are commonly referred to as Tripitaka i.e.
Three fold Basket.
● Tripitaka includes Vinaya Pitaka, Sutta Pitaka, and Abhidhamma Pitaka.
●  The Vinayapitaka comprires of suttavibhanga, Khandakas and
Parivarpatha.
● The Vinay Pitaka :
(a) Mainly deals with rules and regulations, which the Buddha promulgated.
(b) It describes in detail the gradual development of the Sangha.
(c) An account of the life and teaching of the Buddha is also given.
● The Sutta Pitaka is divided into five Nikayas.
● The five Nikayas are Digh Nikaya, Majjhima Nikaya, Samyutta Nikaya,
Anguttara Nikaya and Khuddaka Nikaya.



●  The Sutta Pitaka consists chiefly of discourses delivered by Buddha
himself on different occasions. It lays down the principles of Buddhism.
● The Abhidhamma Pitaka is written in the form of questions and Answers.
The Abhidhamma Pitaka Contains the profound philosophy of the Buddha’s
tecahings.
BUDDHIST ARCHITECTURE
● Buddhist architecture developed essentially in three forms, viz.
(a) Stupa (relics of the Buddha or some prominent Buddhist monks are
preserved)
(b) Chaitya (prayer hall)
(c) Vihara (residence)
JAINISM
● Jainism was founded by Vardhamana Mahavira.
● Mahavira was born in 540 B.C.
● Mahavira’s Birth place was Kundagram in Vaishali
● He belonged to the Jantriak Kshatriya clan.
● His father’s name was Siddhartha and mother’s name was Trishala, who
was a sister of the Lichchavi prince Chetak of Vaishali.
● Mahavira was married to Yashoda.
● He left home at the age of 30 and wandered for 12 years.
● He is regarded as the 24th Tirthankara.
● Rishabha was the 1st Tirthankara.
● Parsavanath was the 23rd Tirthankara.
● Mahavira’s first disciple was Jamali.
● He attained Kaivalya on the bank of river Rijupalika near Jrimbhikgrama.
●  In the course of wandering Mahavira met Mokhliputta (the founder of
Ajivika sect).
● Ashoka’s grandson Samparati accept Jainism.
● In First century A.D. Mathura became the Centre of Jaina art and culture.
● The spread of Jainism in Karnataka is attributed to Chandragupta Maurya.
● Many Jaina followers went to south under the leadership of Bhadrabahu.
● These southern followers later formed the Digambra sect (lives nude)
●  Those who remained at Magadha, under the leadership of Sthalabahu,
formed Shvetambar sect (wears white garments)

FIVE MAIN TEACHINGS



● Non-injury (ahimsa) ● Non-lying ● Non-Stealing (asateya)
●  Non-Possession (aparigraha) ●  Observe continence (Brahamcharya). It
was added by Mahavira.
JAINA LITERATURE
● Most of the literature is written in Prakrit. The jaina Literature includes, (1)
The 12 Angas (2) The 12 Upangas (3) The 10 Prakirna (4) The 6
Chhedsutras (5) The 4 Mulasutras
JAINA COUNCILS
● First Council was held at Pataliputra by Sthulabahu in the beginning of
the third century BC and resulted in the compilation of 12 Angas to replace
the lost 14 Purvas.
●  Second Council was held at Valabhi in the 6th (513 AD) century AD
under the leadership of Devaradhi Kshamasramana and resulted in final
compilation of 12 Angas and 12 Upangas.
Digambaras and Shvetambaras : After the death of Mahavira during the
reign of king Chandragupta Maurya a severe famine led to the migration of
some jains under Bhadrabahu to the Deccan. Sthulabhadra remained in North
and allowed wearing white garments Bhadrabahu maintained nudity leading
to division as Digambaras (sky clad or naked) and shwetambars (white clad).
Similarities between Buddhism and Jainism
● Both opposed Brahmanical domination and caste system but uphold the
essence of Vedas, Preached Truth, non violence, celibacy and detachment
from material comforts, believed in karma and rebirth and were liberal
towards women.
● Aacharangsutra about rules and regulation for Jain Bhikshus.
Differences between Buddhism and Jainism

 Buddhism Jainism

Followers Monks Lay man
Salvation Moderate one Extreme one
Spread Died in India but spread Confined to India and survived

to foreign lands
Ahimsa Liberal Policy Over-emphasis
Soul Did not believe in soul Belived in soul



 
RISE OF MAHAJANAPADAS
●  The Buddhist text Anguttara Nikaya gives the list of sixteen
Mahajanapadas at the time of Buddha.
● These Mahajanapadas extended from the North western Pakistan to east
Bihar and from Himalayas to the river Godavari.
Mahajanapada Capital Area

Mahajanapada Capital Area
Anga Champa Bhagalpur, Munger (Bihar)
Magadha Rajgriha Patna, Gaya (Bihar)
Kasi Varanasi Near Varanasi
Kosal Saketa, Sravasti Eastern Uttar Pradesh
Vajji (Ganasangha) Vaishali Muzaffarpur (Bihar)
Malla Kusinara/Pava Gorakhpur (U.P.)
Chedi Suktimati Bundelkhand (U.P.)
Vatsa Kaushambi Allahabad (U.P.)
Kuru Indraprastha Meerut Delhi region
Panchal Ahicchatra, Kampilya Western U.P.
Sursena Mathura Mathura (U.P.)
Gandhar Taxila Peshawar (Pakistan)
Kamboja Rajpura Near Gandhar
Asmak Paithan Godhavari area (M.H.)
Avanti Ujjain, Mahishmati Malwa region
Matsya Viratnagar Near Jaipur
● Kashi was famous for its cotton textiles and market for horses.
● Champa was noted for its trade and Commerce.
● Vajji represented a confederacy of eight clans.
● The Buddha died in the vicinity of Kusinara.
● The Northern Panchalas had their capital at Ahicchatra.



● The Southern Panchalas had their Capital at Kampilya.
● Viratnagar was used as the hiding place by Pandavas.
●  Mathura was located at the junction of two famous trade routes i.e.
Uttrapatha and Dakshinapatha.
● The Kambojas were regarded as uncultured by the Brahamanical texts.
● The Buddha calls himself Kosalan in the Majjhima Nikaya.
● Kashi had emerged as a cloth manufaturing centre by the time of Buddha.
RISE OF MAGADHA
HARYANK DYNASTY
● The epic Mahabharata has provided information about the early period of
Magadha.
● Jarasandh and Brihdrath were the rulers during the period of Mahabharata.
● Girivraja was the magadhan capital during the early period.
BIMBISARA (544-492 B.C.)
● Bimbisara established Haryank dynasty. Rajgir was the capital of the state.
●  Bimbisara ascended the throne in 544 B.C. Bimbisara had three wives,
mahakosala, Chellana and Khema.
●  Mahakosala was the sister of Kosal ruler Prasenjit and Chellana was
Lichchhavi Princess.
● Bimbisara defeated Anga and annexed it.
●  Bimbisara was contemporary of Buddha. Bimbisara send his physician
Jivak to treat Chand Pradyot of Avanti
● Bimbisara was prisoned by his son Ajatshatru and died in 493 B.C.
AJATSHATRU (492-460 B.C.)
● Ajatshatru sat on Magadha throne in 492 B.C.
● Ajatshatru followed an expansionist policy.
● After a long struggle he defeated Kasi and Vajji confederacy.
●  Ajatshatru took the services of his minister Vassakar to divide the Vajji
confederacy.
● Ajatshatru got a large stupa constructed in Rajgriha.
●  Gautama Buddha died during his reign; arranged the first Buddhist
council.
● Ajatshatru constructed a fort around Rajgriha to protect it from Lichcchavi
attack.
● Ajatshatru was killed by his son Udayin in 461 B.C.



● Udayin transferred the Capital to Patliputra.
● Udayin was a follower of Jainism.
● The last Haryank ruler was Nagdasak.
SHISUNAGA DYNASTY (412-344 B.C.)
● Nagdasak was killed by his minister Shisunaga.
● Shisunaga established Shisunaga dynasty in 412 B.C.
● Shisunaga annexed Avanti to Magadha.
● Shisunaga established his capital at Vaishali.
● Kalashoka came to the throne in 344 B.C.
● Kalashoka again transferred the capital to Pataliputra.
● During the reign of Kalashoka second Buddhist council was organized at
Vaishali.
● Nandivardhan was the last Shisunaga ruler.
NANDA DYNASTY (344-323 B.C.)
● Nanda Dynasty was established by Mahapadmananda.
● According to Puranas he was not a Kshatriya.
● Mahapadmananda was known as Ekarat and Sarvakshatrantaka.
● Mahapadmananda conquered Kalinga.
● Last Nanda ruler was Dhanananda.
● Dhanananda was the contemporary of Alexander.
● Alexander attacked India in the reign of Dhanananda (the last ruler)
● The Nandas were fabulously rich and enormously powerful.
● Nanda Dynasty was destroyed by Chandragupta Maurya and Chanakya.
● Nandas have been termed as first empire builders of India.
FACTORS FOR THE RISE OF MAGADHA
● Magadha enjoyed an advantageous geographical position
● Iron deposits were situated close to Rajgir, the earliest capital of Magadha.
● Rajgir and Pataliputra were situated at very strategic points.
●  Pataliputra was surrounded by rivers from all sides it was called as
jaladurga (water-fort).
● Magadha lay at the centre of the middle Gangetic plain.
● Magadha for the first time used elephants on a large scale in wars.
FOREIGN INVASION



● The Period of 6th century B.C. marked by political instability in North-
West India.
●  In 516 B.C. the Iranian ruler Darius penetrated into North- West India.
Darius annexed Punjab, west of Indus and Sindh.
● This area constituted the 20th kshatrapy (province) of Iran.
● The Indian Kshatrapy included Sindh, the North-West frontier and part of
Punjab.
● The Iranian Scribes brought into India Kharoshti script.
● Under the leadership of Alexander of Macedonia, the Greeks destroyed the
Iranian Empire.
● Alexander marched to India through the Khyber Pass in 326 B.C. Ambhi
was the king of Taxila. Porus ruled between Jhelum and Ravi. Porus
provided a strong resistance to Alexander.
● Battle of Hydaspes was fought between Porus and Alexander.
● Alexander’s invasion paved the way for the expansion of Mauryan Empire
in North West India.
Effects of Alexander’s Invasion It exposed India to Europe by opening up
four distinct lines of communication three by land and one by sea.
●  Due to cultural contacts, a cosmopolition school of art came up in
Gandhara. It paved the way for the unification of North India under
chandragupta by weakening small states.
THE MAURYAN EMPIRE (321 BC - 289 BC)
CHANDRAGUPTA MAURYA (322-295 B.C)
● The Mauryan dynasty was founded by Chandragupta Maurya with the help
of Chanakya or Kautilya.
● Brahamanical texts say he was born of Mura, a sudra women in the court
of the Nandas.
●  An earlier Buddhist tradition says he belonged to the Moriya Kshatriya
clan.
● He fought Seleucus in 305 B.C.
●  Seleucus surrendered a large territory including Paropanisadai (Kabul),
Aria (Herat), Arachosia (Gandhara) and Gedrosia (Baluchistan), in return for
500 elephants.
● According to Jaina tradition Chandragupta was converted to Jainism.
● Chandragupta Maurya passed his last days at Sravanbelagola near Mysore.
Where he died by starvation (Sallekhana/Santhara) ritual of Jains.



●  Seleucus sent an ambassador Megasthenes to the Mauryan court.
Megasthenes wrote the text ‘Indica’
BINDUSARA (298-272 B.C.)
● Bindusara succeeded Chandragupta Maurya.
● In Jain literature he has been called as ‘Simhasen’.
● Antiochus sent Deimachus as an ambassador to Bindusara’s court. Ptolemy
Philedelphus of Egypt sent Dionysius as ambassador.
● He was known as Amitraghata. He was also known as Amitrochates. He
sent his son Ashoka to quell a rebellion in Taxila. He was a followers of
Ajivika sect. The Syrian ambassador Deimachus was sent to his court.
ASHOKA (273-232 B.C.)
● Ashoka (273-232 B.C.) succeeded Bindusara. He was holding viceroyalty
of taxila and Ujjain during his fathers lifetime.
● He fought Kalinga war in 260 B.C. in the 9th year of his reign.
● Under Ashoka, the empire reached its zenith. And in the history, for the
first time, the entire Indian sub-continent came under a single umbrella
(except extreme Southern India).
● Ashoka banned animal sacrifice, regulated the slaughter of animal for food
as per 1st major rock edict.
● 13th rock edict mentions Kalinga war.
●  According to his Maski and Gurjara inscriptions he was known as
Devanam Priya Priyadarshi.
● He was converted to Buddhism by Nigrodh.
● Ashoka sent peace missionaries inside India as well as abroad.
Location of Major Rock Edicts
(1) Kalshi (Dehradun) (2) Manshera (Hazara dist. Pakistan) (3) Shahbazgarhi
(Peshawar) (4) Girnar (Gujarat) (5) Sopara (Near Mumbai) (6) Dhauli
(Odisha) (7) Jaugada (Odisha) (8) Maski (Andhra Pradesh) (9) Yerragudi
(Andhra Pradesh)
Location of Minor Rock Edicts
(1) Bairat (2) Rupnath (3) Sahsaram (4) Rupnath (5) Brahmagiri (6)
Gavimath (7) Jatinga Rameshwar (8) Maski (9) Palkigundu (10) Rajula-
Mandagiri (11) Suvarnagiri (12) Yerragudi (13) Gurjara (14) Ahraura
Location of Pillar Edicts
(1) Allahabad (2) Delhi-Topra (3) Delhi-Meerut (4) Nigalisagar (5) Lauriya-
Araraj (6) Lauriya- Nandangarh (7) Rampurva



FACTS ABOUT ASHOKAN INSCRIPTIONS
● Maski edict discovered in 1915 is the only edict which mentions the name
Ashoka.
● The Topra & Meerut pillars were brought to Delhi by Feroz Shah Tughlaq.
● Ashokan edicts were deciphered by James Princep in 1837.
● The Kausambi pillar was brought to Calcutta by Jahangir.
● The Bairat inscription was brought to Allahabad by Cunningham.
●  Two major rock edicts as Mansehra and Sahbazgarhi are in Kharoshti
script.
● The Kandhar inscription is bilingual- Greek and Aramaic.
● Most of the Ashokan edicts are written in Brahmi script.
● The language used in Ashokan edicts except Kandhar is Prakrit.
● The inscription in fragmentary condition found at Lampak/ Lamghan is in
Aramaic
● In all the edicts except the Maski edict Ashoka refers to himself by his title
Devanampiya Piyadassi.
● The Allahabad pillars (brought from Kausambi) contains the inscription of
Samudra Gupta and Jehangir also.
● Major rock edicts are fourteen in number.
● Total number of pillar edicts is thirteen, they are inscribed in ten pillars.
Out of thirteen seven are major pillar edicts, four are minor pillar edicts and
two are commemorative pillar edicts.
● Of the four minor pillars edicts one is known as Queen’s edict and it is on
Allahabad pillar.
● The commemorative pillar edicts are Rumeindei and Nigalisagar (both in
Nepal).
● The longest among the major rock edict is 13th rock edict (in Odisha).
● 7th pillar edict is longest among all the edicts.
● The Allahabad pillar contains first six pillar edicts, Queen’s edict, Kosam
Schism edicts, Prasasti of Samudragupta written by Harisena and some
decrees of Jehangir.
● Kharosthi script was derived from Persian Aramaic.
● He constructed Sanchi Stupa at Vidisha (M.P.)
POST-MAURYAN DYNASTIES
SUNGAS AND KANVAS
● Pushyamitra laid the foundation of Sunga dynasty.



● Pushyamitra killed the last Mauryan ruler Brihdrath in 185 B.C.
● Patanjali, Malavikagnimitram was a contemporary of Pushyamitra Sunga.
● The last Sunga king was Devabhuti.
THE SATVAHANA DYNASTY
● The Puranas speak only of Andhra rule and not of Satvahana rule. Simuka
was the first Satvahana king.
●  They issued mostly coins of lead. They were the successors of the
Mauryans in the Deccan and the central India.
● Gautamiputra Satkarni (106-130 A.D.) called himself the only Brahamana.
His achievements are recorded in Nasik Inscription.
● Nasik Inscription belongs to his mother Gautami Balasri.
● Satvahanas were the first rulers to make land grants to Brahamanas.
● Prakrit text Gathasaptashati is attributed to Satvahana king Hala. They had
brisk trade with Romans.
● Nasik and Nanaghat are important inscription of the Satvahana period.
THE INDO-GREEKS
● A series of invasions from central Asia began around 200 B.C.
● The first to cross the Hindukush were the Indo–Greeks.
●  The most famous Indo-Greek ruler was Menander (165-145 B.C.). His
capital was Sakala or Sialkot.
●  Menander was converted to Buddhism by Nagasena or Nagarjuna. The
conversation between the two is recorded in a book named ‘Milindapanho’,
or question of Milinda.
● Indo–Greeks were the first to issue gold coins in India.
● They were the first rulers in India to issue coins definitely attributed to the
kings.
●  They also introduced practice of military governorship. The governors
were called ‘Strategos’.
THE SAKAS
● The Greeks were followed by the Sakas. They are referred to as scythians.
The Saka poured into India through the Bolan Pass.
●  The earliest Indian textual reference to the Sakas are found in the
Mahabhasya.
● The most famous of the Saka rulers was Rudradaman (130- 152 A.D.)



● His achievements are highlighted in his Junagarh Inscription. It is the first
major inscription to be written in Sanskrit. It records the repair of Sudarshan
lake undertook by his officers.
THE KUSHAN DYNASTY
● They are referred to as Yuch- Chis or Tocharians.
● They belonged to one of the five clans of the Yuch-Chis tribe.
● They came from North Central Asia near China. Their empire included a
good part of central Asia a portion of Iran a portion of Afghanistan, Pakistan
and almost the whole of North India.
● Kanishka (78-144 A.D.) started the Shaka era (78 A.D.)
● His two capitals were Purushpura (Peshawar) and Mathura.
● Charak was the court physician of Kanishka.
● Fourth Buddhist Council was held under his patronage at Kundalvan.
● Kanishka controlled the famous Silk route in central Asia.
● The Gandhara School of art recieved royal patronage of the Kushans.
● Kanishka provided patronage to Ashvaghosha and Nagarjuna.
THE GUPTAS (320-550 A.D.)
●  Sri Gupta was the founder of Gupta rule. He was succeeded by
Ghatotkacha.
● The real founder of the Gupta power was Chandragupta I (319- 355 A.D.)
He was the first independent king with the title of Maharajadhiraja. He
started the Gupta era in 319-320 A.D. He married a Lichchavi Princess.
● His empire included Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and Bengal.
● Samudragupta (355-380 A.D.) enlarged enormously the Gupta kingdom.
His achievements are mentioned in the Prayag-Prasasti composed by
Harisena. He defeated 12 rulers of Dakshinapatha.
● Harisena and Vasubandhu adorned his court.
● He was a great patron of art and adopted the title of Kaviraja. On some
coins he is shown playing the Veena.
● V.A. Smith calls Samudragupta the ‘Napoleon of India’.
●  Virasena was the commander of Samdragupta during his southern
campaign.
● Samudragupta performed the Aswamedha Yajna and struck gold coins of
Yupa type. He granted permission to the Buddhist king of Ceylon
Meghavarman to build a Monastery at Bodh Gaya.



●  Samudragupta was succeeded by Ramgupta but Chandragupta II killed
him and married his queen Dhruvadevi. He entered into matrimonial alliance
with the Nagas by marrying princess Kubernaga. He defeated the Saka king
Rudrasimha III and annexed his kingdom.
●  He adopted the title of Vikramaditya. Mehrauli iron pillar inscription
mentions his authority over North western India and a portion of Bengal.
●  Virasena’s Udaigiri cave inscription refers to his conquest of the whole
world. He made Ujjain his second capital.
●  His court contained 9 gems including Kalidasa, Amarsimha, Fa-hien,
Acharya Dignaga etc.
●  Veerasena Saba was the court poet and minister of Chandragupta II.
Amarkhaddava was his army general.
● Fa-hien, the Chinese traveller came during the time of Chandragupta II.
● He issued silver and copper coins.
Taxes Levied during the Gupta Dynasty
Bhag Kings share of produce
Bhoga General tribute
Hiranya Tax on special produce taken in cash
Bedakbhog Irrigation tax
Bhatta Police tax
Charasana Grazing tax
Chat Security tax
Gupta Temples : Places
Vishnu temple : Tigawa (Jabalpur)
Dasavtar temple : Deogarh (Jhansi)
Bhitargaon temple : Bhitargaon
● His predecessors had issued only gold coins. The gold coins were called
‘Dinara’.
● Chandragupta II was succeeded by Kumargupta I. His inscriptions are the
Bilsad inscription, the Karandanda inscription, the Mandsor inscription, the
Damodarpur copper plate inscription.
● He founded the Nalanda University.
●  Towards the last year of his reign, the Gupta empire faced foreign
invasions.
● Skandagupta had to fight the Pushyamitras and the Hunas.
● The Junagarh inscription of his reign tells that his governor Parnadatta got
the Sudarshan lake repaired. He adopted the title of Vikramaditya.



HARSHVARDHAN (606-647 A.D.)
●  Harshavardhan ascended the Pushyabhuti throne in 606 A.D.
Harshavardhan was also known as Siladitya.
● Banabhatta and Hiuen Tsang have provided important information about
Harsha’s reign. Poet Banabhatta wrote ‘Harshacharita’.
●  Harsha was not successful in his first expedition against Gauda. In his
second expedition Harsha conquered Magadha and Sasanka’s empire. Gauda
was divided between Harsha and Bhaskarvarman.
● The Aihole inscription mentions that Harsha met defeat at the hands of
Pulakesin II.
●  Harsha’s empire extended from the Punjab to northern Orissa and from
Himalayas to the banks of Narmada.
●  Harsha wrote three Sanskrit plays-Nagananda, Ratnavali and
Priyadarshika.
● Banabhatta wrote Harshacharita and Kadambri.
● Harsha showed equal respect to all religious sects.
● Harsha built rest houses, hospitals, and endowed numerous Brahamanical,
Buddhist and Jaina establishments.
● The Kannauj assembly was held in the honour of Hiuen-Tsang.
● Harsha used to celebrate religious festivals at the end of every five years at
Prayag.
● Harsha sent an embassy in 641 A.D. to the Chinese emperor.
● Harsha also received a Chinese embassy in return.
SOUTH INDIAN DYNASTIES
THE CHALUKYAS OF BADAMI (543-757 A.D.)
● The Vakatakas in the deccan were followed by the Chalukyas of Badami.
The Chalukyas established their base at Badami (Vatapi) in Bijapur district of
Karnataka.
● The Chalukyas claimed their descent either from Manu or Moon.
● Pulakesin-I (543-66) : founder of the Chalukya dynasty, established a small
kingdom with Badami/Vatapi in Bijapur District as its capital.
● Pulakesin II was able to check Harsha’s design to conquer Deccan. Aihole
inscription is a eulogy written by his court poet Ravikirti.
● The Chinese pilgrim Hiuen Tsang Visited his kingdom.
●  Pallava ruler Narsimhavarman I invaded the Chalukya kingdom, killed
Pulakesin II and captured Badami.



●  Vishnuvardhan, son of Pulakesin II, founded the eastern branch of the
Chalukyas with its capital at Vengi.
THE PALLAVAS (560-803)
● The Pallavas played an important role after the fall of Satvahanas in 3rd
century until the rise of the Cholas.
● The origin of Pallavas is a debatable issue.
●  Pallava dynasty was founded by Simhavisnu in 560 A.D. ●
Mahendravarman-I was defeated by Pulakesin-II.
●  Narasimhavarman was the greatest king. He defeated Pulakesin II and
captured Badami/Vatapi. So, took the title of Vatapikonda.
● Narsimhavarman also defeated Cholas, Cheras and Pandyas, thus became
supreme in South India.
● Narsimhavarman was a great builder, having constructed Mamallapuram
and the various buildings here. During his reign Hieun Tsang visited Kanchi.
● Narsimhavarman II constructed the shore temple of Mamallapuram and the
Kailasnath temple of Kanchi. He sent embassies to China to encourage
maritime trade.
●  Nandivarman-II was a worshipper of Vishnu. He built Vaikuntaperumal
temple at Kanchi.
● The last Pallava ruler, Aparajita Pallava was defeated by Aditya Chola.
● Kanchi, Pallavas capital was a great centre of Sanskrit learning.
●  Both Bharavi and Dandin, the authors of ‘Kirtarjuniyam’ and
‘Dashkumarcharitam’ respectively lived in the Pallava court.
● The scientific works of Varahamihira and the poetry of Kalidasa were well
known in the Pallava country.
●  Most of the kings were accomplished scholars and Mahendravarman-I
himself wrote the famous burlesque ‘Mattavilasa Prahasana.’
THE GANGAS
● The Gangas were the contemporaries of the Chalukyas and the Pallavas.
They ruled over a large part of modern Mysore.
● The region was called after them as Gangavadi.
●  The founder of the Ganga dynasty was Konkanivarman
Dharmamahadhiraja. The Gangas had matrimonial alliances with the
Pallavas, Chalukyas and Rashtrakutas.
THE KADAMBAS



● The Kadamba dynasty was founded by Mayur Sarman.
● The Kadambas ruled from Banvasi from 345 A.D. to 365 A.D.
●  Kakusthavarman (435-455 A.D.) was the most powerful ruler of the
dynasty.
●  Kakusthavarman established matrimonial relations with the Gangas and
the Guptas.
THE CHOLAS
● The Cholas were the feudatories of the Pallavas
● The founder of Chola dynasty was Vijayalaya, who was at first a feudatory
of the Pallavas. He captured Tanjore in 850 A.D.
●  The greatest Chola rulers were Rajaraja (985-1014 A.D.) and his son
Rajendra I (1014-1044 A.D.)
● Raja built a Saiva, a temple of Rajarajeshwara at Tanjore.
● Rajendra I assumed the title of Gangaikondachola and built a city called
Gangaikondacholapuram.
● The Chola empire was divided into Mandalams or provinces and these in
turn were divided into Valanadu and Nadu.
●  Chola rulers marked their victories by erecting a number of Shiva and
Vishnu temples.
● During the reign of Rajendra I a naval expedition was sent against the Sri
Vijaya empire.
● The Bay of Bengal was converted into a ‘Chola lake’.
● Rajaraja gave his daughter Kundavai to Vimaladitya (Eastern Chalukya of
Vengi) and restored Vengi to him.
● Rajaraja conferred the title of ‘Mahadandanayaka’ upon Rajendra-I for his
victory over Pandyas & Keralas.
● Rajaraja-I started the system of land survey called ‘kadamb’.
● Adhirajendra was killed in a public revolt.
● Kulotunga-I of Vengi united the kingdom of Eastern Chalukyas of Vengi
and Chola kingdom. His other name was Rajendra-II. He was given the title
of Sangam Tavirtta (he who abolished tolls).
● Rajendra II was crowned in the battle field of Koppam. He was given the
title of Prakesari.
● The gopuram style was developed under the Cholas.
● The system of canals in south is a contribution of the Cholas.
● Rajendra-I built Shiva temple at Gangaikondacholapuram.



● The Cholas were famous for the bronze statue of Nataraja.
● Kamban wrote Ramayana. Sivagasindamani was also produced.
● Temple architecture in south attained its climax under the Cholas. The style
of architecture which came into vogue during this period is called Dravida.
● ‘Mandap’ was the pillared hall. ‘Garbhgriha’ was the room of the chief-
deity.
Administrative Units of Chola Dynasty

Mandalam Province
Kottam Division
Nadu District
Kurtam Group of villages
Tripartite Struggle (Palas, Pratiharas and Rastrakutas)
● A number of powerful empires arose in Northern India and the Deccan
between 750 A.D.-1000 A.D.
● The Gurjara Pratiharas, the Palas and the Rastrakutas emerged almost at
the same time.
● These three powers fought for the supremacy over Kannauj.
THE PRATIHARAS
● The Pratiharas emerged from Gurjaratra or South West Rajasthan. They
resisted Araburincrusions from Sindh into Rajasthan.
● Pratihara dynasty was founded by Nagabhatta-I. Pratihara power revived
under Nagabhatta-II. He defeated Dharmapala near Monghyr (Mudgir).
Their capital was at Mahodaya (Kannauj).
● The real founder and the greatest king was Bhoja (836–885 A.D.). Bhoja is
also called Mihir Bhoja. He defeated Devapala and got Kannauj back. Bhoja
was a devotee of Vishnu and adopted the title of Adivaraha.
THE PALAS
● The Pala empire was founded by Gopala in 750 A.D. Gopala was elected
as the king by the notable men of the area.
● Gopala was succeeded by his son Dharmapala in 770 A.D.
● Palas established their rule in Bengal and Bihar.
●  Dharmapala (770-810) was defeated by Dhruva (Rashtrakuta) and
Nagabhatt II (Pratihara).



● During Dharmapala, two brothers Indra & Chakra clashed for Kannauj.
Dharmapala revived Nalanda University, which had been famous all over the
eastern world. He also founded the Vikramshila University.
THE RASHTRAKUTAS
●  Founded by Dantidurga in deccan. Their capital was at Manyakhet or
Malkhed near modern Sholapur (earlier at Ellora).
● Amoghvarsha rulled for 68 years. Amoghvarsha wrote ‘Kavirajamarga’, a
book on Poetics Kannada. Amoghavarsha first transferred capital from Ellora
to Manyakhet or Malkhed.
● Indira III (915-927) defeated Mahipala (Pratihara) and sacked Kannauj in
915, Indra was the most powerful ruler of his time.
● Rashtrakutas imported horses from Arabia, West-Asia and central Asia.
● In the Rashtrakuta kingdom, the directly administered areas, were divided
into Rashtras (provinces), Visaya and Bhukti.
● The last ruler Karka was overthrown by Tailap, the founder of Chalukyas
of Kalyani.
● Dantidurga built the Dashavatara temple at Ellora.
● Krishna-I built the Kailasa or Shiva temple at Ellora in the 9th century.
●  The great Apabhramsha poet Svayambhu and his son lived at the
Rashtrakuta court.
REGIONAL DYNASTIES
THE PARMARAS
● The Parmaras ruled in the Malwa region. The Parmaras initially had their
capital at Ujjain. The Parmaras later transferred their capital to Dhara.
● Vakpati Munj was the founder of the Parmara dynasty.
● Padmagupta, Dhananjya, graced the court of Vakpati.
● The greatest ruler of dynasty was Bhoja. Bhoja built the city of Bhojapur.
Bhoja founded a college, Bhojshala near Dhara.
THE GAHADAVALS
● The Gahadaval dynasty was founded by Chandradeva.
● The capital of Gahadaval was Kannauj.
●  In the Battle of Chandawar (1194 A.D.) Muhammad Ghori defeated
Jaichandra.
● Harischandra was the last ruler of Gahadaval dynasty.



THE CHAUHANS
●  The Chahamana (Chauhan) dynasty emerged near Sakambhari (Ajmer).
The Chauhans were the feudatories of Pratihara.
● Simharaja declared independence in the middle of 10th century. Ajayraja
founded the city of Ajaymeru (Ajmer).
●  Prithviraja Chauhan ascended to the throne in 1177 A.D. He defeated
Muhammad Ghori in the first battle of Tarain (1191 A.D.). In the second
battle of Tarain (1192 A.D.) Muhammad Ghori defeated Prithviraja Chauhan.
KASHMIR
● Three dynasties Karkota, Utpala and Lohar ruled Kashmir during 800 A.D.
to 1200 A.D.
● Karkota dynasty was founded by Durlabh Vardhana.
● Lalitaditya Muktapida defeated Yasovarman of Kannauj.
● Lalitaditya built the famous Sun temple at Martand.
● Utpala dynasty was founded by Avantivarman.
● Queen Didda ruled from 980 A.D. to 1003 A.D. ● Sangramraja founded
the Lohara dynasty.
● King Harsha belonged to Lohara dynasty.
● Kalhana wrote ‘Rajatarangini’ in 12th century.
THE CHANDELLAS
●  The Chandelas ruled in Bundelkhand. The dynasty was founded by
Nanuka in the early years of 9th century and his capital was Khajuraho.
●  Dhanga was the first independent king of the Chandella dynasty and
assumed the title Maharajadhiraja.
● He was succeeded by Ganda who in turn was succeeded by Vidyadhara.
● During Vidyadhara’s reign Mahmud of Ghazni invaded Kalinjar in 1019
and again in 1022.
● In 1165 Parmardideva was defeated by Prithviraja Chauhan.
●  Qutub-ud-din Aibak defeated Parmadideva and occupied greater part of
Bundelkhand.
● Alauddin Khalji captured the whole of the kingdom.
● Temples of Khajuraho were built by Chandellas.
●  The most prmoinent among the Khajuraho temples are the Kandariya
Mahadeva, Devi Jagadamba, Parsvanatha, Lakshamana and the Viswanatha
temples.



THE SENAS
● The Senas supplanted the Palas in Bengal.
● The Senas called themselves ‘Brahma Kshatriya’.
● Vijayapuri and Vikrampuri were two capitals of Senas.
● Vijayasena was succeed by his son Ballalsena.
● Ballalsena established the tradition of ‘Kulinism’.
● Ballalsena wrote ‘Adbhutsagar’ and ‘Dansagar’.
● Bakhtiyar Khalji invaded Bengal during the reign of Lakshmansena.
● Jayadeva, Dhoyi, Halayudha adorned Lakshmansena’s court.
THE SANGAM AGE
● The word Sangam is associated with the assembly of Tamil Scholars and
Poets flourished under the royal patronage of the Pandyan Kings at Madurai.
● The first Sangam was held at Madurai but its work has not survived. Its
Chairman was Agastya.
●  The second Sangam was held in Kapatpuram. Its Chairman was
Tolkapiyar.
● The third Sangam was held in Madurai. Its chairman was Nakkirar.
● Tolkapiyam belongs to second Sangam. Tokapiyam is a work on grammar.
● The Sangam literature was compiled in circa A.D. 300-600.
● Thirukural of Kural by Tiruvalluvar is sometimes called the ‘fifth Veda’ or
‘Bible of the Tamil land’.
● Silpaddikaram literally ‘The jeweled Anklet’ by Ilango Adigal is an epic,
deals with the love stories of Kovalan and Madhavi.
● Manimekhalai is written by Sattalai Sattanar, considered the ‘Odysseus of
Tamil poetry’.
● Jivaga Chintamani, a third epic by the Jaina Tiruttakadevar.
● Roman king built a temple of Augustus at Muziris.
●  Murugan was the God par excellence of the Tamils, also known as
Subramaniyam.
Sangam Literature
●  The word Sangam is associated with a college or assembly of Tamil
scholars and poets flourished under the royal patronage of the Pandyan kings.
● The whole Sangam age is called Golden or Augustan Age. According to
Tamil sources, the father of Tamil literature is ‘Agastya.’
SANGAM AGE (AD First-Third Century)



 
Kingdom Location Capital Emblem Famous Famous Rules

port
Chola North- Uraiyaur Tiger Puhar Elara was the earliest
(Cholam- East of (famous known Chola king, ffe
andalam) Pandyas for conquered Sri Lanka and

between Cotton ruled over it for 50 years.
Penner trade) Karikala founded the
and Vellar and capital city
rivers Puhar Puhar/Kaveripatnam and

constructed embankment
along Cauveri river.

Chera Part of Venji of Bow Muzris Udiyangera is one of the
Kerala Karur Todi, earliest known Chera
and Tamil Bandar rulers. This title of
Nadu Udiyangeral was given to

him because he served
both the armies of
KurukshetraWar,
Senguttuvan / Red Chera,
was the greatest Chera
King, ffe invaded the
north and crossed Ganga.

Pandya Southern Mudurai Carp Korkai, Mudukudumi was the
most part Saliyur earlist known Pandyan
of India ruler. Nedunjelian was the

most important king of
Pandya. He accused
Kovalon of theft. As a
result, the city of Madurai
was laid under a curse by
Kannagi (Kovalan's wife).



 
Sangams Venue Chairman Surviving Text

1st Ten-Madurai Agastya —
2nd Kapatapuran Alvai Agastya (founder Tolakappiyan (Tamil

Tolakappiyan (later Grammar)
chairman))

3rd North Madurai Nakkirar Ettutogati Patinenki
lakanakku, pattu-Pattu

 
ANCIENT INDIAN BOOKS & ITS AUTHORS

Books Author Books Author
Ashtadhyayi Panini Meghduta Kalidas
Buddhacharita Asvaghosha Mitakshara Vijnaneshwara
Charak Samhita Charak Mrichhkatikam Sudraka
Devi Chandra- Vishakadutta Mudra Rakshasha Vishakhdatta
guptam  Nagananda Harshavardhana

Gita Govind Jayadeva Natya Shashtra Bharata
Harsha Charita Banabhatta Nitisara Kamandaki
Kadambari Banabhatta Priyadarshika Harshavardhana
Kumar Sambhava Kalidas Ramcharita Sandhyakara
Kumarpalcharita Hemchandra  Nandi

Mahabhashya Patanjali Ritu Samhara Kalidas
Mahavir Charita Bhavabhuti Sisupal Vadha Magha
Malvikagnimitram Kalidas Susruta Samhita Susruta
Revenue Terminologies

Karai Land tax
Irai Tribute paid by feudatories and body collected in war



Iravu Extra demand or forced gift
Ulgu Custom duties
Variyar Tax collector
Variyan A well known unit of territory yielding tax
 
MEDIEVAL INDIA
Map of Medieval India :
● A number of powerful empires arose in Northern India and the Deccan
between 750 A.D.–1000 A.D. i.e. Rajput Age. There are Gurjara Prathihars,
Palas, Rastrakutas, Chauhan, Parmars, Chalukya, Gahadawal Tomars etc.
●  Mahmud Ghazni invaded Kannauj in 1018 A.D. and Somnath in 1025
A.D.
● In 1194 A.D. Muhammad Ghori returned to India. The battles of Tarain
and Chandawar laid the foundations of Turkish rule in India.
● After the death of Muhammad Ghori, his slave Qutubuddin Aibak laid the
foundation of Slave dynasty in 1206 A.D.
MUSLIM INVASION
THE GHAZNAVIS
● Alpatgin established an independent kingdom with its capital at Ghazni.
● Mahmud ascended the throne (998-1030) at Ghazni.
● Firdausi was the poet laureate at the court of Mahmud.
● Firdausi wrote ‘Shah Namah’.
● Mahmud is said to have made 17 raids into India.
● In 1001 Jayapala, the Hindushahi, ruler was defeated.
● After the battle, Punjab passed into the hands of Ghaznavis.
● Mahmud invaded Kannauj in 1018 and Somnath in 1025 A.D.
● Mahmud died at Ghazni in 1030 A.D.
THE TURKISH CONQUEST
● The Ghurid empire rose into prominence in North-West Afghanistan.
● The Ghurids had started as vassals of Ghazni, but had soon thrown off its
yoke.
●  In 1173, Shahabuddin Muhammad (Muhammad Ghori) ascended the
throne at Ghazni.



● By 1190, Muhammad Ghori had conquered Peshawar, Lahore and Sialkot.
● In India Chauhans had captured Delhi from the Tomars.
● Conflict between Muhammad Ghori and Prithviraj Chauhan started with
rival claims for Tabarhinda (Bhatinda)
● The First Battle of Tarain was fought in 1191 A.D.
● In this battle the Ghori forces were completely routed.
Muhammad Ghori’s life was saved by a young Khalji horseman.
● The Second battle of Tarain was fought in 1192 A.D.
● This battle is regarded as one of the turning points in Indian History.
● Prithviraj Chauhan escaped but was captured near Saraswati.
● After Tarain Muhammad Ghori returned to Ghazni.
● Sufi Saint Khwaja Moinuddin Chisti came with Muhammad Ghori from
Afghanistan.
●  He left the affairs in India in the hands of his trusted slave Qutubuddin
Aibak.
● In 1194 A.D. Muhammad Ghori returned to India.
●  The battle of Chandawar (1194 A.D.) was fought between Muhammad
Ghori and Jaichandra.
● Jaichandra was defeated in the battle of Chandawar.
●  The battles of Tarain and Chandawar laid the foundations of Turkish in
India.
DELHI SULTANATE
The Sultanate of Delhi had five ruling dynasties –
1. The Ilbari — 1206-1290 AD.
2. The Khalji — 1290-1320 AD.
3. The Tughluq— 1320-1413 AD.
4. The Saiyid — 1414 - 1451 AD.
5. The Lodhis — 1451 - 1526 AD.
1. The Ilbari (The Slave Dynasty)
QUTUBUDDIN AIBAK (1206-1210)
● He was crowned at Lahore later the death of Muhammad Ghori. He did not
make any fresh conquests and ruled from Lahore. He died in 1210 while
playing chaugan (horse polo)
●  He was famous for his generosity and earned sobriquet of Lak- Baksha
(giver of Lakhs)
● He got his daughter married to Iltutmish.



●  He laid the foundation of Qutab Minar in Delhi after the name of the
famous sufi saint Khwaja Qutbuddin Bakhtiar Kaki which was completed by
Iltutmish.
● He was succeeded by his inexperiened and incapable son Aram Shah who
ruled at Lahore for about eight months before being defeated and deposed by
his son-in-law-Iltutmish.
● The Turks only introduced polo in India.
●  Aibak constructed the first mosque in India named Quwwatul- Islam in
Delhi and Adhye Din ka Jhopara in Ajmer, Rajasthan.
ILTUTMISH
● At the time of Qutubuddin’s death, he was the governor of Badaun. He
made Delhi the capital of his empire. He was the real founder of Delhi
Sultanate.
● He was the slave of Qutubuddin Aibak. He first defeated rivals Particularly
Tajuddin Yalduz and Nasiruddin Qubacha who were two surviving officers
of Mohd. Ghori.
● Due to his deplomatic skill, he prevented Mongol attack.
●  He formed ‘Turkan-i-Chahalgani or chalisa. Chalisa was a group of 40
powerful Turkish nobles to suppress rebels.
● He divided his empire into ‘Iqtas’. It is an assignment of land in lieu of
salary, which he distributed to his officers.
● He introduced the silver ‘Tanka’ and two copper ‘Jital’-basi coins of the
sultanate. He introduced ‘Arabian coin’ first time.
● He transfered his capital to Delhi from Lahore.
●  In 1229, he received a deed of investiture from the Abassid caliph of
Baghdad. It was a formal recognition of his independent position as a sultan
of the sultanate of Delhi and as a member of the world fraternity of Islamic
states.
●  He completed the construction of Qutub Minar which was started by
Aibak.
RUKNUDDIN FIROZ
● After the death of Iltutmish, the Turkish nobles raised his son Ruknuddin
Firoz to the throne.
● But Razia took help of some powerful disgruntled nobles and won over the
throne of Delhi and deposed Firoz.



RAZIA : (1236-40)
● She was the first and last muslim woman ruler of Delhi Sultanate. She
appointed an Abysinian Slave, Jamaluddin Yakut as the ‘Amir-e-Akhur’
(Superintendent of horses)
●  Altunia, the governor of Sirhind revolted. She won over Altunia and
married him however both of them were killed by bandits when they were
enroute to Delhi to defeat the revolt there.
MUIZUDDIN BAHRAMSHAH (1240-42) & MASUD SHALI (1242-46)
● The successors of Razia were Muzuddin Bahramshah and Alauddin Masud
Shah. Both fell to prey to the power struggle between powerful nobles.
NASIRUDDIN MAHMUD (1246-65)
● In 1246, Nasiruddin Mahmud ascended the throne but the real power was
in the hands of Balban.
● Nasiruddin handed over all the powers to Balban.
● He awarded tittle ‘Ulugh Khan’ (Great Khan) to Balban.
● He married with Balban’s daughter.
● Minhaj -us-Siraj dedicated his book, ‘Tabaqati-Nasiri’ to him.
● He was a calligraphist.
BALBAN (1265-1287)
●  He himself was a member of Chalisa. His objective was to restore the
prestige of crown.
● For this he started the Iranian Practise (method) of ‘Sajda’ and ‘Paibos’ to
the Sultan.
● He destroyed the chahalganis power.
● He introduced the persian Festival ‘Nauroz’ to impress nobles and people.
He called himself the ‘Nasiramir-ul-momim or caliph’s right hand man.
● He was the first sultanate to propound the theory of kingship. According to
it king is the shadow of God.
● To Guard himself, he got every member of Iltutmish family killed and gave
a death blow to the turkish nobility (Chalisa).
● He employed an efficient spy system.
● He followed a policy of ‘blood and Iron’. To control the onslaught of the
Mongols, he founded the ‘Diwan- I-Ariz’ or the military department.
● He was a liberal patron of persian literature and showed special favour to
the Port, Amir Khusro.



KAIQUBAD (1287-1290)
● After Balban’s death, Kaiqubad and Kaymurs became sultans.
● After 3 months Kaymurs the last Ilbari was killed and Jalaluddin ascended
the throne.
The Khalji Dynasty (1290-1320)
Jalaluddin Firoj Shah Khalji (1290-1296) Qutubuddin Mubarak Shah (1316-
1320) Khusrau Khan (1320) Alauddin Khalji (1296-1316)
JALAUDDIN KHALJI (1290-1296)
● Khalji Dynasty was founded by Jalaluddin Khalji
● He began to rule from Kilkhori
● He crushed the rebellion of Malik Chajju but later pardoned him.
● He rebelled the attack of Mongols under Abdullah
● one of the most important events of Jalaluddin’s reign was the invasion of
Devagiri the capital of the Yadav kingdom in the Deccan by Alauddin Khalji.
ALAUDDIN KHALJI (1290-1296)
● Alauddin Khalji’s real name was Aligurshasp.
● He was the governor of Kara.
● Maximum number of Mongol attacks happend during his reign. He fought
and diminished the Mongol menace
● He adopted the title of Sikandari- Saini
● Amir Khusro was given the title of Tota-i-Hind.
● He created the first regular standing army of Delhi Sultanate.
They were paid in cash
● He also captured Malik Kafur and took him to the royal court.
● In 1300 AD, he captured Ranthambhor which was under Hammirdev.
● In 1303 AD, under Ratan Singh, Chittor was captured.
● Alauddin sent Malik Kafur to capture South India.
● Malik Kafur attacked Devgiri.
● According to Amir Khusro, Malik Kafur reached as far as Rameshwaram.
● Malik Kafur was given the title of ‘Malik Naib’
●  Alauddin Khalji centralized his administration and introduced many
reforms
● Barid & Munhis were appointed to strengthned the spy system.
●  Social gathering of nobles and matrimonial alliances among them were
prohibited. Wine and gambling also prohibited.



● He was the first sultan to collect land revenue was based on measurement
and Biswa was the unit of measurement.
● He was also the first sultan to fix ‘land revenue in cash’.
●  Cultivators were brought under direct control of states and middleman
were deprived of powers and privileges.
● He appointed Diwan-i- Mustakharaj to collect arrears.
● ‘Ghari’ (house tax) and ‘Chari’ (Grazing tax) levied.
● All patwari accounts were audited.
●  Prices of goods were fixed on the principle of Bar Award (productions
cost).
● Land revenue from Khalisa village was paid in cash.
● Dagh or branding of horse was introduced.
● Khams collected 4/5 th.
●  He built Alai minar (incomplete) height twice of Qutub Minar) Ali
Darwaza, Siri Fort and the second capital Mahal Hazar Satoon (palace of
thousand Pillars) and Jamat Khana mosque.
● Ali Darwaza was first sultanate building on scientific method.
Arc and dome were used. It is now entrance of Qutub Minar complex.
MUBARAK KHALJI (1290-1296)
●  After the death of Alauddin, Mubarak Khalji acquired the throne. He
declared himself the Khalifa and took the title “Al Wasiq Billah”.
● He was killed and succeeded by Nasiruddin Khusrau Shah.
● He was the only Hindu convert to sit in the throne of Delhi
The Tughlaq Dynasty (1320-1414)
GHIYASUDDIN TUGHLAQ (1320-1325)
● He ascended the throne after murdering Khusrau Shah.
● He was the first sultan to use term ‘Ghazi’ with his name.
● During Allauddin Khalji’s reign, he was crown as Kazi Malik, governor of
Dipalpur
● He was the first sultan to start irrigation works.
● He died due to collapse of Pavillion.
● He built the fortified city of Tughlaqabad and made it capital of the empire.
MUHAMMAD BIN TUGHLAQ (1324-1351)
● He is one of the most controversial figures in sultanate history. His real
name was Jauna Khan.



● During his reign, Delhi Sultanate reached its maximum territorial extent.
He was called the ‘wisest fool’ by historian Isami.
● He fixed the land revenue at half the produce and not on the basis of actual
produce but on arbitrary basis, this led to wide spread rebellion which was
accompanied by severe famine.
● He instituted agricultural reforms by setting up a separate department of
agriculture called Diwan-I-Amir-Kohi. He gave ‘sondhar’ and ‘Taqqavi’
loans to farmers.
● He died in ‘thatta’ where he had gone to quell one of the many rebellians
that took place during his reigns
● Bahamani and Vijayanagar kingodm were formed during his reign.
● He was succeeded by his nephew Firoz Tuglaq.
● Ibn Batuta a famous traveller came to Delhi in the reign of Muhammad
Bin Tughlaq in 1334 AD. Ibn Batuta has recorded the contemporary Indian
scene in his safarnamah called Rehla.
FIROZ TUGHLAQ (1320-1325)
Works and facts about Firoz shah Tughlaq
● Irrigation extended massively by digging canals and wells.
● Gardens and orchard’s planted.
Established 1200 gardens around Delhi for grapes.
● As well as 23 taxes were abolished.
Only 4 taxes sanctioned by shariat were levied.
(i) Kharaj (1/10th of produce)
(ii) Zakat (Alms for poor Muslims)
(iii) Jaziya (poll tax on nonmuslims)
(iv) Khams (1/5th of the spoils of war)
● Jaziya was separated from land tax, earlier it was part of land tax. Jaziya
was also imposed on Brahmins (earlier exempted) only women, children,
disabled exempted.
● Sharb (irrigation tax) 1/10th of produce was imposed.
●  Free hospitals (Darul Shafa), marriage bureau and employment bureau
were set up.
● Officials were paid by iqta grants, very few were paid in cash.
● In 1353 led campaign against Haji Illyas of Bengal but failed in siege of
Ikadalamud fort.



●  In 1358 second Bengal campaign against Sikandar Shah Ilyas who
accepted Firoz’s suzerainty.
●  Raja Gajpati of Jajnagar (Orissa) was attacked and Jagannath temple of
Puri was sacked.
●  In 1365 Nagarkot campaign was successful, 1300 Sanskrit manuscripts
from Jawalamukhi temple were collected and got translated into Persian as
the Dalai-i-Firoz Shahi (by Azizudin Khan).
● He had 180,000 slave set up Diwan-i-Bandagan (for slaves)
● Founded towns of Jaunpur (old name Manaich) named after Jauna Khan,
Hisar Firoza, Fatehabad and Firozabad (Firoz Shah Kotla, the 5th city of
Delhi).
● Topara and Meerut pillars of Ashoka were brought to Delhi.
● Diwan-i-Khairat, the chairty bureau formed.
● Introduced new coins Adha (1/ 2 Jital) and Bikh (1/4th Jital).
● Firoz Shahi Madarsa was built at Firozabad.
● Banned unislamic practices e.g., prohibiting women to pray at graves of
sufi saints.
● He repaired the Qutubaminar which had been struck by lightening.
● The chief architect of Firoz was Ghazi Shahna.
● He wrote Fautuhat-i-Firoz Shahi.
● He entertained great regard for the Caliph of Egypt and styled himself as
his deputy.
● He revived the jagir system which had been abolished by Alauddin.
Sayyids Dynasty (1414-1451)
● After Firoz Shah Tughlaq, Muhammad Khan, Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq Shah-
II, Abu Baqr, Nasiruddin Muhammad, Humayun and finally Nasiruddin
Mahmud ascended the throne.
● Taimur invaded Delhi in 1398 A.D.
● Nasiruddin Mahmud fled to Gujarat.
● Nasiruddin Mahmud died in Kaithal.
KHIZR KHAN (1320-1325)
● He was the founder of sayyid Dynasty.
● He acquired throne at Delhi by replacing its defect ruler Daulat Khan.
● As a reward for his service Taimur gave him the governership of Multan,
Lahore and Depal.



● After departure of Taimur, he declared himself the viceroy of Taimur in
North-western India.
● Later he invaded Delhi and become its master.
MUBARAK KHAN (1421-1434)
● After the death of Khizr Khan his son Mubarak Shah become the ruler of
Delhi.
● He fell a victim to the conspiracies by the nobles.
● He was beheaded by them in February 1434 AD.
MUHAMMAD SHAH (1434-1445)
● Muhammad Shah came to throne as he was raised by Sarver-ul- Mulk
● He adopted the title of ‘Shah’ and issued the coin of his name.
ALAM SHAH (1434-1445)
● He was the last ruler of Sayyid dynasty.
●  Sayyid dynasty’s 37 years remained troubled with external invasions &
internal chaos.
Lodhi Dynasty (1451-1526)
Bahlol Lodhi (1451-1489) Ibrahim Lodhi (1517-1526) Sikandar Lodhi
(1489-1517)
BAHLOL LODHI (1451-1489)
● Lodhis were Afgans by race. Bahlol Lodhi was the first founder of Afghan
state.
● He deposed Shah Alam and laid the foundation of the Lodhi dynasty. He
annexed the Sharqui Kingdom of Jaunpur in 1484.
● He was succeeded by Sikandar Sha Shal Lodhi.
● He adopted the title of ‘Ghazi’.
SIKANDAR LODHI (1489-1517)
● His real name was Nizam Khan. He was the noblest of the three Lodhi
rulers.
● He introduced ‘Gazz-i-Sikandri’, new yard for land measurment. In 1504,
he founded the city of Agra and made it his capital.
● He wrote verses in persian under pen name of ‘Gulrukhi.’
● In 1506, he repaired Qutub Minar.
IBRAHIM LODHI (1517-1526)



● He was repressive ruler.
● He was defeated and killed by Babar in the 1st battle of Panipat in 1526.
● He was the last rules of Lodhi dynasty.
VIJAY NAGAR EMPIRE (1336-1650 AD)
● Vijay Nagar was founded by Harihar & Bukka in 1336.
● They had earlier served under the kaktiya ruler of warangal Pratprudra II.
● Harihar nad Bukka were the son of Sangama.
● They were brought to the center by Mohammad Bin Tughlaq converted to
Islam and were sent to south again to control rebellion, but on the instance of
Vidyaranya, they established Vijaynagar kingdom in 1336 AD.
● Vidyaranya was the carer of them.
● Vijaynagar was located on the bank of Tungbhadra.
● There were four dynasties in Vijaynagar empire.
● 1 – Sangam dynasty 2 – Saluva dynasty 3 – Tuluva dynasty 4 – Aravidu
dynasty
SANGAMA DYNASTY
● Harihar was the first ruler.
● Vidyaranya was his Guru.
● Bukka-I fought with the Bahmani Sultan Muhammad Shah I and signed a
treaty with him.
●  Devraya I constructed a dam across the river Tungbhadra to solve the
problem of shortage of water.
● Italian travelors Nicolo Conti visited during his region.
● His court was adorned by the giften Telgu Poet Srinatha.
● Srinatha was the author of Haravilasam.
● He had to face invasion by the Bahmani ruler Firoz Shah and he had to
surrender the fort of Bankapur.
● Devraya II was the greatest Sangama ruler.
● He was called Immadidevaraya and Proudha Devaraya.
● The inscriptions call him as Gajabetekara (the elepant hunter)
● He wrote two Sanskrit works –(i) Mahanatak Sudhanidhi (ii) Commentary
on the Brahama sutras of Badanarayan.
● Persian ambassador Abdul Razzaq visited his court.
● Sangam dynasty was replaced by saluva dynasty.
SULUVA DYNASTY (1485-1505)



● Saluva dynasty was lasted for two decades.
● Saluva Narsingh was the founder of Saluva dynasty.
● The saluvas were closely pinked to the Sangamas Viamarreage
● Saluva Mangu served Kumara kampana in his campains against the sultan
of madura and was awarded the title Saluva.
TULUVA DYNASTY (1505-1570)
● Vir Narasimha : was the founder of the Tuluva dynasty.
SADASHIVA RAYA :
● The real power lay in the hands of his minister Rana Raya.
● The Deccani Sultans except Berar joined hands to defeat Vijayanagar in
the famous battle of Talikota or Rakshsa Tangadi in 1556.
●  The Vijaynagar government now shifted to Penukonda and later to
Chanregiri, which was made the capital by venkat II of Aravidu dynasty.
ARAVIDU DYNASTY (1570-1650)
● This dynasty was founded by Rama Raya’s brother, Thirumala.
● Thirumala deposed Sadashiva Raya from throne.
● Thirumala’s son Ranga II expanded the empire.
● Venkat II succeeded his father Thirumala in 1586.
● His head office was Chandragiri. He died in 1614 AD.
● He was the last great ruler of Vijaynagar.
●  Rang III become ruler after Venkat II and after that Vijaynagar empire
ended.
TRAVELLERS DURING VIJAYANAGAR EMPIRE

Foreign Country Ruler Time
Travellers

1. Nicoli Conti Italy Devraya I 1420 AD.
2. Abdur Razzak Persian Devraya II 1434 AD.
3. Fernoa Nuniz Portugal Mallikarjun 1450 AD.
4. Domingos Peas Portugal Krishnadev Raya 1515 AD.
5. Barbosa Portugal Krishnadev Raya 1516 AD.
6. Nikitin Russian Devraya I 1515 AD.



 
ADMINISTRATIVE UNIT OF VIJAYNAGAR EMPIRE.
1. Mandal — State
2. Kottam or Valnadu — District
3. Nadu — Tahsil
4. Melagram — 50 Villages
5. Kar — Village
THE BAHMANI KINGDOM
● The Bahmani kingdom was founded by Zafar Khan in 1347.
● Zafar Khan took in title of Alauddin Hasan Bahman Shah.
● The capital of the Bahmani kingdom was at Gulbarga.
● Gulbarga was renamed as Ahsanabad.
● The greatest Bahmani ruler was Tajuddin Firoz Shah.
●  Firoz Shah was a good calligraphist and poet and often composed
extempore verses.
●  According to Farishta, Firoz Shah was well versed not only in Persian,
Arabic and Turkish but also in Telugu, Kannada and Marathi.
● The most remarkable step taken by Firoz Shah Bahmani was the induction
of Hindus in the administration on a large scale, particularly, Deccani
Brahmans in the revenue administration.
●  Firoz Shah Bahmani encouraged the Pursuit of astronomy and built an
observatory near Daulatabad.
● Chaul and Dabhol were main ports of Bahmani Kingdom.
● Firoz Shah Bahmani married a daughter of Deva Raya-I of Vijayanagar.
● In 1419 Firoz Shah Bahmani was defeated by Devaraya-I.
TOWNS AND FOUNDERS

Towns Founder Daulatabad Muhammad-bin-
Tughlaq

Pataliputra Udayan Allahabad Akbar
Jaunpur Firoz Tughlaq Siri Alauddin Khilji
Jodhpur Rao Jodha Jaipur Sawai Raja Jai

Singh
Hyderabad Md. Quli Qutub Srinagar Ashoka



Shah
Ahmedabad Ahmad Shah Khizrabad Khizr Khan
Hoshangabad Husang Shah   
BABUR (1526-1530)
● Zahiruddin Muhammad Babur was the founder of the Mughal empire in
India.
● Babur was the king of Farghana in Afghanistan.
●  Taking advantage of the political conditions prevailing in India, Babur
marched towards India.
● Babur defeated Ibrahim Lodi in first Battle of Panipat in 1526 A.D.
● Before the Battle of Panipat (1526 A.D.) Babur had made four expeditions
to India.
● In has 1519 (first-Indian expedition) he used gun powder for the first time
in India to storm fort of Bhira.
● Rana Sanga sent a message to Kabul, inviting him.
● 5th expedition in 1526 Battle of Panipat against Ibrahim Lodi, here used
Rumi (ottoman) device and Tulugama tactics.
● In 1527 he defeated Rana Sanga of Mewar in battle of Khanwa on the bank
of river Piliakhar.
●  In 1529 he defeated Ibrahim Lodi’s younger brother, Mahmud Lodi in
battle of Ghaghara.
● His Indian empire extended from Himalayas in north to Gwalior in South
and from Khyber pass in west to border of Bengal in east.
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE MUGHAL RULE
The Mughal Empire
Zahiruddin Babar
●  Babur had the prestige of being a descendent of the two most famous
warriors of Asia, Changez and Taimur.
● The ‘Charbaghs’ the symmetrically laid out gardens with flowing waters
and fountains were introduced in India by Babar.
HUMAYUN (1530-1540, 1555-1556 A.D.)
● Nasiruddin Muhammad Humayun succeeded Babur.



● Humayun ruled from 1530 A.D. to 1540 A.D. and again from 1555-1556
A.D.
● Humayun built Dinpanah at Delhi as his second capital.
● In 1539, Afghan leader Sher Shah defeated him at Chausa (Bihar)
● In 1540 Sher Shah again defeated him in battle of Kannauj.
● After battle of Kannauj (1540) Humayun fled, took shelter for a few days
at Amarkot (ruler Rana Virsala)
● In 1545, he went to Shah Tahmasp’s court in Persia (Iran) who aided him
in conquering Kandhar.
● In 1551 Askari was exiled to Mecca.
●  Humayun died in 1556 A.D. of fall from his library Sher Mandal.
Humayun’s tomb is situated in Delhi.
●  Humayun’s tomb was built by his widow Hamida Banu Begum. Mirza
Inayatullah was the chief architect of Humayun’s tomb.
●  Humayun brought two painters from Iran, Mir Sayyid Ali and Abdus
Samad.
SHER SHAH (1540-1545 A.D.)
● Sher Shah’s childhood name was Farid. Sher Shah was born to Hasan, the
Jagirdar of Sasaram. He received the title of Sher Shah from Bahar Khan
Lohani, the Afghan Governor of South Bihar.
● Sher Shah gained Chunar by marrying the widow, Malika.
● He defeated Humayun in the battle of Chausa. He adopted the title of Sher
Shah and proclaimed himself the emperor of Hindustan.
● He again defeated Humayun in the battle of Kannauj or Bilgram.
● Sher Shah’s last campaign was against Kalingar. He succeeded but died
from an explosion in 1545.
● He was succeeded by his son Islam Shah.
● Humayun defeated Sikandar Suri and occupied Delhi in 1555. Sher Shah
established a highly centralised Government.
● He divided his empire into 47 Sarkars (districts) which were divided into
several pargana (subdistricts). Village was the lowest unit of administ ration.
He made the local village headmen (muqaddams) and zamindars responsible
for local crime.
●  He built many sarais. He built the grand trunk road from Sonargaon to
Attock. He improved the land revenue system by adopting Zabti-i-Har-Sal.
● Sher Shah abolished all internal customs and duties.



●  Sher Shah built three important roads, Agra-Jodhpur-Chittor, Lahore-
Multan, and Agra- Burhanpur.
● Sher Shah built 1700 sarais which also worked as dak chaukis.
● Sher Shah ascended the throne of Delhi at the ripe age of 67.
● Abbas Khan Sarwani was the historian of Sher Shah.
● The sole survivor of this is the Old Fort (Purana Qila) in Delhi. Sher Shah
was succeeded by his second son, Islam Shah.
AKBAR (1556-1605 A.D.)
● Akbar was born in Amarkot in the palace of Virasal in 1542 A.D. Akbar’s
full name was Jalaluddin Muhammad Akbar.
● He was crowned at Kalanaur at the age of 13 years. Akbar defeated Hemu
in the second battle of Panipat in 1556 A.D.
● Bairam Khan was his regent from 1556 to 1560. Bairam Khan was a Shia.
He was assassinated by Mubarak Khan at Patan (Gujarat) on his way to
Mecca.
● Laid the foundation of Fatehpur Sikri as his capital.
● In 1668, Chittor under Rana Udai Singh of Mewar was invaded. Here two
Rajput warriors fought bravely against Akbar-Jaimal and Patta.
●  In 1576 Akbar defeated Rana Pratap of Chittor in the famous Battle of
Haldigati.
●  Tried to ban sati system, and legalised widow marriage. Increased
marriagable age (girls 14 years, boys 16 years)
●  Set up Ibadat-khana at Sikri for religious discussion, held on every
Thursday evening from 1575.
● Later Ibadat-khana was opened to Scholars of all faiths.
● In 1579 Akabr read the Khutba (written by poet Faizi) in his own name
like the Prophet and Caliphs.
●  In 1579 proclamation of the Mahzar, all imams signed it where by he
became Imam-i-Adil, the supreme interpreter of Islamic law in all
controversial matters, it made him higher than a Mujtahid (interpreter of
Islamic Law)
● In 1582 Tauhid-i-Ilahi (Divine monotheism) was initiated 80 years later it
came to be called Din-i-Ilahi. It was sufistic.
● After returning from Gujarat campaign, Akbar appointed officials called
Karoris.
● Akbar divided the empire into 12 Subas in 1580 AD.



● In 1605 Akbar died of dysentery. Buried at Sikandara Near Agra.
● Loan to farmers was called takavi.
● Started worshipping light (Prakash Pujas) in court.
● With the help of Raja Todarmal (revenue minister) began land settlement
and launched Ain-i- Dahsala system.
●  Issued round and square size silver coins called Rupaya and Jalali.
Adopted Persian as court language.
●  Laid foundation of Fatehpur Sikri in 1572-1580. Main Buldings of
Fatehpur Sikri. Buland Darwaza, Diwan-i-Am, Diwan-i-Khas, palace of
Sultana, Panch Mahal etc.
● Expert exponent of music. He played Nakkara (drum).
● His court musicians-Tansen, Baba Ramdas, Baz Bahadur etc.
●  Famous painters in his court Khwaja Abdus Samad, Daswant, Basawan
etc.
● Got Mahabharata translated into Persian as Razmnama.
● Contemporary Hindu scholars Ramdas, Suradas, Tulsidas, Raskhan, Abdur
Rahim Khan- Khanan and Birbal (Raja Mahesh Das).
●  Akbar’s land revenue system was called Todar Mal Bandobast or Zabti
system. Todar Mal was his Revenue Minister.
● Organised army and started Mansabdari system in 1575-1576.
Akbar’s social & Religious work
1. 1562 AD. End of Slave system
2. 1562 AD. End of ‘Haramdal’
3. 1563 AD. End of Pilgrime tax
4. 1564 AD. End of Jazia tax
5. 1571 AD. Eastablish of Fateh Pur Sikri & made it his capital
6. 1580 AD. ‘Dahsala System’
7. 1562 AD. Din-i-Ilahi
Nine Gems of Akbar
1. Mullah do Pyaja 2. Abul Fajal 3. Todar Mal 4. Faizi 5. Birbal 6. Tansen 7.
Abdul Rahim-Khan-i- Khana 8. Man Singh 9. Bhagwan Das
JAHANGIR (1605-1627 A.D.)
● Jahangir was born at Lahore in 1569 A.D. Jahangir also married Jodha Bai
of Marwar, and a Kachchwaha princes.
● He established Zanjir-i-Adal at Agra Fort for the seekers of royal justice.



● His son Khusrau, who received patronage of Guru Arjun Dev, revolted
agaisnt Jahangir. The fifth Sikh Guru Arjun Dev was later sentenced to death
for his blessings to the rebel prince.
●  Khurram (Shahjahan) supported by his father-in-law, Asaf Khan, also
revolted against Jahangir but the two soon reconciled.
●  His military general, Mahabat Khan revolted and abducted him but
Nurjahan saved him due to her diplomatic efforts.
● He was well read and wrote his memories Tuzuk-i-Jahangiri in Persian.
● Jahangir’s sons-Khusrau Parvez Khurram, Shahryar and Jahandar.
● James-I sent captain Hawkins and Sir Thoams Roe to Jahangir’s court to
get concession in trade for English.
● Laid many gardens, like Shalimar Bagh in Kashmir.
●  Jahangir built a mosque in Lahore, Itmaduddaula’s tomb in Agra (first
building to have Peutra Deura), completed Akbar’s tomb in Sikandara.
● During Jahangir, Mughal painting was on climax.
●  Portrait painting and paintings of animals & birds started. Mansur was
expert in this style.
● Introduced Du-Aspa and Sih-Aspa systems in Mansabdari system.
● Jahangir met Nur Jahan on Nauroz (new years day) in Mina Bazar of Agra,
married her in 1611. In 1613 Nur Jahan was made Padshah Begum (the first
lady).
● Farmans had signature and coins were struck in her name.
● Khusrau was blinded and in 1620 he was killed on the orders of Khurram
at Burhanpur.
● John Hawkins resided at Agra for two years (1609-1611). He was given
the mansab of 400.
● Sir Thomas Roe (1615-1618) was ambassador of James-I.
● Jahangir was buried at Shahadara near Lahore.
● The famous Italian traveller Pietro Valle came during his reign.
SHAHJAHAN (1628-1657 A.D.)
●  Shahjahan was born at Lahore in 1592 A.D. His childhood name was
Khurram. He was born to Jagat Gosain, daughter of Mota Raja Udai Singh of
Jodhpur.
● In 1612 Shahjahan married Arzumand Banu Begum who became famous
as Mumtaz Mahal.



● In 1631 Mumtaj Mahal died during child birth at Burhanpur. She was first
buried at Burhanpur but later transferred to Agra (Taj Mahal).
●  Shah Jahan’s six children from Mumtaj Begum-Jahanara Begum, Dara
Shikoh, Shah Shuja, Roshan Ara Begum, Aurangzeb (born at Daulatabad)
and Murad Baksh.
●  Shah Jahan introduced 1/3, 1/ 4, 1/5 method in Mansabadari system.
According to this a mansabdar had to keep horsemen 1/3, 1/4, 1/5 of his
sawar rank.
● Built Taj Mahal in the sweet memory of Mumtaj Mahal in 1632-1654 of
marbles (white).
●  Built Moti Masjid (Pearl Mosque) in Agra Fort. Built Jama Masjid and
Red Fort of Delhi and laid foundation of Shahjahanabad (the 7th city of
Delhi). These were made of red sandstone.
●  Jagannath Pandit was the poet of his court. Shah Jahan was an expert
musician and his voice was very melodious.
● Constructed Peacock throne (1628-1635).
● Attacked Hooghly against portuguese and captured it in 1632.
●  Foreign travellers who visit his court were Bernier (France). Travernier
(France) and Manucci (Italy).
● His period was the climax of Mughal architecture.
AURANGZEB (1658-1707 A.D.)
● Aurangzeb’s full name was Muihiuddin Muhammad Aurangzeb. He was
the third son of Mumtaz Mahal. He had to fight war of succession to gain the
throne.
●  He took the title of ‘Alamgir’ in 1659. He was called as Zinda Pir, the
living saint. He forbade inscription of Kalma on the coins. He ended the
celebration of Navroz festival.
● Mutasib (regulator of moral conduct) were appointed.
● He ended Jharokha darshan, use of almanacs and weighing of the emperor.
● Jaziya was re-introduced.
● Built Moti Masjid (Pearl Mosque) in Red Fort of Delhi.
● The proportion of Hindus mansabdars was highest in Aurangzeb’s reign.
●  Aurangzeb ordered the arrest and execution of the ninth Sikh Guru Teg
Bahadur in AD 1675.
● Guru Govind Singh wrote letters to Aurangzeb, their collection is called
Zafarnama.



●  Shambhaji (son of Shivaji) was captured at Sanghameshwar (1689) and
executed.
● Bijapur (1686) and Golconda (1687) were annexed.
● His tomb is located in Aurangabad, Maharashtra.
●  Expert Vina player. Banned singing in court, but allowed Royal Band
(Naubat).
● Restarted Pilgrim tax. Disallowed cultivation of Hemp (Bhang).
● In 1669, Jats under Gokla revolted.
● In 1672, Satnamis, nick-named Mundiya Sadhus, founded by Birbhan near
Narnaul revolted.
● In 1685, second Jat rebellion under Raja Ram and his successor Churaman.
● In 1667, Yusufzai tribe of Afghans, under the Raushanai movement led by
Bhagu rebelled.
● In 1672, second Afghan rebellion by the Afridi tribe led by Akmal Khan.
MUGHAL ADMINISTRATION (Political system)

Post Department Sadra Religious
interest

Dewan Finance Darogaadak  
Mirbakshi Civil Services on Mir Bahar Admiral

Military line
Khansama Management of Mir Barr Forest

Royal farry
Kaji Judiciary department Mir Tajak Festival
 
DECLINE OF MUGHAL EMPIRE
List of Later Mughals
1. Bahadur Shah I (1707-1712)
● He was known as Shah -i- Bekhabar
● He pursued Pacifist Policy that is why he called so.
2. Jahandar Shah (1712-1713)
● Ascended the throne with the aid of Zulfikar Khan
● First pupet Mughal emperor.
● He abolished Jazia.



3. Farrukh Siyar (1713-1719)
● He had succeeded to the throne with the help of Sayyid brothers, Abdullah
Khan and Hussain Ali.
●  In 1719 Sayyid brothers killed him with the help of Maratha Peshwa,
Balaji Vishwanath.
4. Mohammad Shah (1719-48)
● He was the most pleasure loving ruler of loose morals and therefore, called
Mohammad Shah ‘Rangila’.
●  Nadir Shah defeated him in the Battle of Karnal (1739) and took away
peacock throne and the kohinoor diomand.
5. Ahmad Shah (1748-54)
● During Ahmad Shah’s reign, Ahmad Shah Abdali invaded India twice in
1749 and 1752 when he marched up to Delhi.
6. Alamgir II (1754-59)
● After the dethronement of Ahmad Shah, Azizuddin a grandson of Jahandar
Shah was placed on the throne as Alamgir II.
7. Shah Alam II (1759-1806)
● Battle of Buxar (1764) held during his reign.
8. Akbar II (1806-37)
● Gave the title of Raja to Ram Mohan Roy.
9. Bahadur Shah II (1837 - 57)
● During the revolt of 1857, he was proclaimed the emperor by the rebels.
RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS OF MEDIEVAL INDIA
● The Bhakti Movement began in South India in the 7th Century. The Alvars
(Vaishnavites) and Naynars (Shaivites) popularised the Bhakti cult in South
India.
● There were 12 Alvar Vaishnavite and 63 Naynar Saivite Saints.
● The writings of these saints were collected in the Tirumurai. It has been
called as the Tamil Veda.
● Periya Puranam was composed by Shekkilar in the reign of the Chola king
Kulottunga I.
● Ramananda was the first great Bhakti saint of North India.
● Raidas, Kabir, Dhanna, Pipa were his disciples.
● Kabir (1440-1518) belonged to a family of weavers. Kabir spent greater
part of his life in Banaras. Kabir’s verses were included in Adi Granth.
● Raidas was a tanner.



● Dhanna was a Jat peasant from Rajasthan.
● Guru Nanak (1469-1539) was born at Nankana Sahib.
● Kabir and Nanak were Nirguna Bhakti saints.
●  Vallabhacharya was a Telugu Brahmana. He was the founder of Pushti
marga (way of grace)
● Chaitanya (1486-1533) was the most prominent Vaishnav saint of Bengal.
He popularized Krishna Bhakti. He was looked upon as living Krishna.
●  Jnaneswar (1275-1296) was the pioneer Bhakti Saint of Maharashtra.
Jnaneswar wrote Jnaneswari. Jnaneswari is a commentary on Bhagavad Gita.
Jnaneswar was the author of many hymns called Abhangas.
● Namdeva (1270-1350) was a tailor by caste. Namdeva travelled to North
India and Punjab. Namdev’s Bhakti Songs have been included in the Adi
Granth. Namdeva is considered to be a part of the Varkari tradition.
● In Assam, Sankaradeva (1449- 1568) introduced bhakti.
● Sankaradeva’s sect is called Mahapurushiya dharma.
● Dadu (1544-1603) was inspired by Kabir’s doctrine.
●  Tukaram’s teachings are in the form of Abhangas or dohas. Tukaram
founded the Varkari Sect.
● Ramdasa wrote Dasabodha. Ramdasa was the Guru of Shivaji.
● The Lingayat Sect was founded by Basava.
● The biography of Chaitanya is ‘Chaitanya charitamrita’.
● The biography of Chaitanya was written by Krishnadas Kaviraj.
● The disciples of Kabir later formed the Kabirpanthi sect.
● Jagjivan Das founded the Satnami sect.
● Tulsidas wrote Ramcharitmanas, Vinaypatrika, Kavitavali.
● Surdas wrote Sur Surawali, Sahitya Ratna, Sursagar.
● Mirabai was a Rajput Princes of Merta. Mirabai married to Bhojraja, son of
Rana Sanga. Mirabai was famous for her devotion to Krishna. Mirabai
advocated image-worship and observance of special fasts. Mirabai wrote
Several poems like Padavali;
● Ramanuja advocated the philsophy of Vishistadvaitavada.
● Madhvacharya founded the Dvaita philosophy.
● Nimbarka propounded the Dvaitadvaita philosophy.
● Nimbarka founded the Sanak Sampradaya.
SOME SECTS DURING BHAKTI MOVEMENT

Garden Place Built by



1. Hast Bahist Rambagh Agra Babur
2. Shalimar Bagh Srinagar Jahangir
3. Nishat Bagh Srinagar Asaf Khan
4. Shailimar Bagh Lahore ShahJahan
5. Hayat Bagh Delhi Shah Jahan
6. Shalimar Bagh Delhi Shah Jahan
7. Wazir Bagh Kashmir Dara Shikoh
8. Char Burji Bagh Near Lahore Zebunnisa
● Al Hujuiri was the earliest Sufi saint to have settled in India.
● Al Hujuiri wrote ‘Kashful Mahjub’.
● The Chishti and Suhrawardi orders were the most prominent.
● The Chishti order was founded by Muinuddin Chishti.
● He arrived around 1192 A.D. and established his centre at Ajmer.
● Muinuddin Chisti’s disciple was Hamiduddin Nagauri.
● Qutubminar is named after the Chishti saint Qutubuddin Bakhtiyar Kaki.
● His disciple was Farid Ganj-i- Shakar.
● He built his Jamaat Khana in Ajodhan (Punjab).
SUFI MOVEMENT
●  The Suhrawardi order in India was founded by Bahauddin Zakaria of
Multan.
● The Suharwardi sufis established themselves mainly in North-West India.
● The Chishti mystics believed in the spiritual value of Music.
● Khwaja Qutubuddin Bakhtiar Kaki died in a state of ecstasy under the spell
of Music.
● Khwaja Fariduddin Masud was known as Baba Farid.
● Shaikh Nizamuddin Auliya was the Chief disciple of Baba Farid.
● Nizamuddin Auliya had problem with Mubarak Khalji and Ghayasuddin
Tughlaq.
●  Shaikh Husamuddin and Shah Barkatullah were prominent Sufis in
Gujarat.
● Shaikh Abdul Quddus Gangohi was a mystic of the Sabiria order.
● Akbar was greatly devoted to Salim Chishti of Fatehpur.
● Tansen was the disciple of Mohammad Ghaus.



Malavikagnimitram
● Dara belonged to the Qadariya order.
Sufi Sect

Sufi Sect Founders
Chisti Khwaza Moin-ud-din
Shurawardi Shiabuddin Shurawardi
Kadari Sheikh Abdul Kadir Jalani
Satari Shah Abdul Satari
Firdoshi Badruddin
Naqshabandi Khwaza Baqi Billah.
● Naqshabandi order was introduced in India by Baqi Billah.
● Shah Waliullah (1702-1762) was a saint of Naqshabandi order.
● Shah Waliullah tried to reconcile the two doctrines of Wahadat-ul Wujud
and Wahadat-ul-Shuhud.
● Khwaja Mir Dard was the famous Urdu Poet.
● Mullah daud Wrote Chhanda in Hindavi.
● Shaikh Nasiruddin was known as Chiragh-i-Delhi.
THE MARATHAS
● Shivaji was born in the fort of Shivneri in Poona in 1627. He belonged to
Bhonsle clan. His father Shahji Bhonsle was in the service of Ahmadnagar.
●  Dadaji Kondadeo and Guru Ramdas had great influence on the life of
Shivaji.
● Guru Ramdas wrote ‘Dasabodh’.
● Shahji gave Shivaji the jagir of Poona. Shivaji first captured Torna in 1646
A.D. Shivaji began his real career of conquest in 1656 when he conquered
Javli from the Maratha Chief Chandra Rao More.
● In 1663, Shivaji injured Shaista Khan, the Mughal Governor.
● In 1664 Shivaji sacked Surat for the first time.
● The treaty of Purandhar was signed on June 24, 1665 A.D.
● Shivaji visited Agra in 1666, On August 29, 1666, Shivaji escaped from
Agra.
●  Shivaji was coronated at Raigarh in 1674. He assumed the title of
Chhatrapati Haindava Dharmodharak.



● Shivaji died in 1680 at the age of 53. Shivaji was succeeded by Sambhaji
(1680-89)
●  Shivaji introduced various administrative and revenue reforms called
Ashtapradhan Provinces which were divided into prants which were further
subdivided into parganas or tarafs.
● The cavalry was divided into two classes : the Bargis and Silahdars.
● Chauth was 1/4 of the land revenue paid to the Marathas to that land would
not be sullied to the Maratha raids.
● Sardeshmukhi was an additional levy of 10%, which Shivaji demanded on
the basis of being the hereditary Sardeshmukh.
● Kathi was measuring in rods.
● Annaji Datto introduced various reforms in revenue in 1679.
●  Chauth and Sardeshmukhi both were land tax collected from Mughal
territory.
ASHTAPRADHANA
1. Peshwa General Administration; like Prime Minister.
2. Sar-i-Naubat Senapati
3. Mazumdar Accountant
4. Waqia-i-navis Intelligence, posts and household affairs.
5. Surnavis Chitnis Correspondence
6. Dabir/Sumant Foreign affairs and master of ceremonies.
7. Nyayadhis Justice
8. Panditrao religious affairs.

MARATHA PESHWAS (1714-1818 A.D.)
1714-1720 : Balaji Vishwanath
1720-1740 : Baji Rao I
1740-1761 : Balaji Baji Rao
1761-1772 : Madhava Rao Ballal
1772-1773 : Narayan Rao
1773-1774 : Raghunath Rao
1774-1796 : Madhava Rao Narayan
1796-1818 : Baji Rao II



MODERN INDIA
COMING OF EUROPEANS
● Vasco da Gama landed at Calicut in 1498 A.D. Vasco Da Gama returned to
Portugal in 1499 with cargo worth 60 times of his expenses.
● Portuguese set up trading stations at Calicut, Cochin, and Cannore in 1502.
● Cartaz system (passes given to ships) was introduced by Portugese.
● Cochin was the early capital of Portuguese in India. Later Goa replaced it.
● De Almeida was the first Portuguese governor (1505-1509) in India.
●  Albuquerque was appointed second governor of Portuguese in India in
1509.
●  Albuquerque encouraged his country men to marry Indian womens. He
persecuted the Muslims.
● In March 1602, the Dutch east India company was formed.
●  The name of the company was ‘Uereenigde Oost Indische Companie’.
(also known as Dutch United East India Company)
●  Till 1690 Pulicat was their main centre in India, thereafter Nagapattam
replaced it.
● Their final collapse with their defeat by the English in the battle of Badera
in 1759.
●  The English east India Company was formed by a group of merchants
known as “The Merchant Adventurers’ in 1599”.
● Captain Hawkins arrived at Jahangir court in 1609 and was given a mansab
of 400.
● Sir Thomas Roe was an ambassador of James-I to Jahangir’s court.
●  In 1661 AD the Portuguese gave Bombay as a part of dowry to their
princess, on her marriage with charles-II of Britain.
● Queen Elizabeth was the largest share holder of East India Company.
● Masulipatnam (1611) was first English settlement on East-coast.
●  In 1717 Farrukh Siyar confirmed the privileges (farman) of 1691 and
extended them to Gujarat and Deccan also.
● The Danes formed an East India Company in 1616.
● Serampore was their headquarter in India.
●  Establishment of the first French factory at Surat by Francois Caron in
1668.
● Establishments of a factory at Masulipatnam by Marcara in 1669.



●  In 1673, acquisition of village of Valikondapuram (Pondicherry) and
Bellanger de Lespinay by Francois
● Arrival of Dupleix, French Governor in India in 1742 and the beginning of
the Anglo-French conflict (Carnatic wars), resulting in defeat of French
power in India.
● French were finally defeated in the battle of Wandiwash (1760) by English
and they lost almost all Indian settlements (by the treaty of Paris in 1763) to
English.
Establishment of First European
Factories in India.

Company Year of Estd.
Estado da India (Portuguese Company) 1498
British East India Company 1600
Verrenigde Oost Indische Companie (Dutch) 1602
Danish East India Company 1616
Compagnie des Indes Orientales (French) 1664

ENTRY OF EUROPEAN POWERS
Portuguese → Dutch → English → Danes → French
Company Year of Estd.
Estado da India (Portuguese Company) 1498
British East India Company 1600
Verrenigde Oost Indische Companie (Dutch) 1602
Danish East India Company 1616
Compagnie des Indes Orientales (French) 1664
ESTABLISHMENT OF BRITISH RULES
●  The Carnatic Wars, Battle of Plassey and Buxar, Anglo-Maratha wars,
Anglo-Mysore wars established British Supremacy.
THE CARNATIC WARS
● These were the Anglo-French conflicts. These wars were continued for 20
years from 1744 to 1763 A.D.
●  First War (1744-1748) : French captured Madras Treaty of Aix-La-
Chapelle, (1748) ended the War of Austrian Succession.



●  Second War (1749-1754): Dupleix aligned with Muzaffar Jung
(Hyderabad) and Chanda Sahib (Carnatic). After initial reverses, Robert
Clive emerged victorius. Godeheau signed the treaty of Pondicherry in 1755
with the English.
●  Third War (1758-1763) : French, Count de Lally captured ‘Fort
St.David’. French were defeated at Wandiwash (1760) under General Eyre
Coote. Pondicherry was returened to French by the Treaty of Paris.
CONQUEST OF BENGAL
● Nawab Sirajuddaulah was against the misuse of Dastaks.
● Nawab Sirajuddaulah seige the English factory at Qasim Bazaar.
● On 20th June, 1756 Fort William (Calcutta) was caputred.
● The Nawab placed Calcutta under the charge of Manik chand.
● The Black Hole Episode – mass death of English soldiers in a chamber -
took place at Calcutta.
● Calcutta recovered by Clive in early 1757.
● Battle of Plassey was fought on 23rd June, 1757.
●  The English East India Company’s forces under Robert Clive defeated
Siraj-ud-Daulah. Mir jaffar, Manikchand, Aminchand, Jagat Seth betrayed
Nawab.
● Mir Jaffar was proclaimed Nawab of Bengal. The company recieved the
Zamindari of 24 Parganas. The company recieved free trading rights in
Bengal, Bihar and Orissa.
● Mir Jaffar was replaced by Mir Qasim in 1760 A.D. ● Mir Qasim-Shifted
capital to Monghyr. He ceded Burdwan, Midnapore and Chittagong. He fled
to Awadh and formed a confederacy. Shujauddaulah and Shah Alam were
part of the confederation.
●  Battle of Buxar was fought on 22nd October, 1764. Mir Qasim was
defeated by Major Munro. The Battle of Buxar placed Awadh under the
company. Mir Jaffar was again placed on throne.
● After the death of Mir Jaffar Nizamud- daulah was placed on the throne.
Nizam-ud-daulah signed the Treaty of Allahabad in 1765 with Mughal
emperor Shah Alam II.
● The company got the Diwani of Bihar, Bengal and Orissa.
● The Diwani was granted by Mughal Emperor.
● Clive introduced the Dual system of government.
● Warren Hestings ended the Dual system in 1772.



ANGLO MYSORE WARS
● First War (1766-1769) : Haider Ali defeated the British army. The Treaty
of Madras Signed.
● Second War (1780-1784) : Warren Hastings attacked French port Mahe,
which was in Haider Ali’s territory. Haider Ali led a joint front with Nizam
and Marathas and captured Arcot. In 1781, Haider Ali was defeated at Porto
Novo by Eyre Coot. Treaty of Mangalore (1784) was signed by Tipu Sultan.
●  Third War (1789-1792) : Marathas and Nizam aided the British,
Cornwallis captured Bangalore. By Treaty of Srirangapatnam, Tipu ceded
half of his territories.
● Fourth War (1799) : Tipu enlisted himself as a member of the Jacobin
Club, also planted a tree of liberty at Srirangapatnam. Lord Wellesley
attacked and Tipu died.
Arthur Wellesley who was the brother of the Governor-General, also
participated in this war.
ANGLO-MARATHA WARS
● First Anglo Maratha War was fought from 1775-1782 A.D. The Britishers
signed Treaty of Surat with Raghunath Rao (1775). The Treaty of Purandhar
was made in 1775.
● The Treaty of Salbai (1782) gave 20 years of peace.
● The Second Maratha war was fought from 1803-1806 A.D. The Primary
cause was the Treaty of Bassein (1802).
● The Scindia and the Bhonsle were defeated.
● The Third Anglo Maratha War was fought in 1817-1818.
● The Maratha confederacy was completely destroyed.
●  Peshwa Baji Rao-II was dethroned and pensioned off at Bithur near
Kanpur.
ANGLO-SIKH WARS
● Period of political instability prevailed after Ranjit Singh.
● The First War was fought in 1845- 1846.
● Treaty of Lahore (1846) ended the War.
● The Second War was fought in 1848-1849.
● The Sikhs were defeated.
● Lord Dalhousie annexed Punjab in 1849.
1857 REVOLT



● On 29th March, 1857 the sepoys at Barrackpore refused to use the greased
cartridge.
● Mangal Pandey attacked and fired on the Adjutant.
● The 34 Native Infantry was disbanded.
● Delhi was seized by the rebels on 12th May 1857.
1857 REVOLTS : AT A GLANCE

Centre Leaders Time Officer Who Date of
Period Suppressed the Suppression

Revolt
Delhi Bahadur Shah, 11 May, 57 Nicholson and 20 Sep., 57

Bakht Khan Hudson
Kanpur Nana Saheb, Tatia 5 June, 57 Colin Campbell Dec., 57

Tope
Luckow Hazrat Mahal, 4 June, 57 Colin Campbell 31 Mar., 58

Birjis Qadir
Jhansi, Rani Laxmibai, 4 June, 57 Gen. Hugh 17 June,
Gawalior Tatia Tope  Rose 1858

Jagdish- Kunwar Singh, 12 June, 57 Major William December,
pur Amar Singh  Taylor 1858

Faizabad Maulvi Ahmadullah June 1857 — 5 June,
Allahabad Liakat Ali June 1857 Col. Neill 1858
Bareilly Khan Bahadur June 1857 Campbell 1858

VIEW OVER THE REOVLT 1857
● R.C. Majumdar : Neither first nor National nor War of Independence
● V.D. Savarkar : First war of Indian Independence
● Sir John Seeley : Wholly unpatriotic and selfish sepoy Mutiny
● Joutram and W Taylor : Hindu- Muslim Conspiracy
● Hugh Rose : Here lay the woman (Laxmi Bai), who was the only man
among the rebels.
● T.R. Holmes : Conflict between civilisation and Barbarism.



CAUSES OF FAILURE
● The revolt remained confined to small part of North India.
● lack of resources as compared to those of the British.
●  The rebel leaders lacked political leadership, military experience and
strategic knowledge and limited social base
●  Sikh, Marathas, Rajputs and some other sections of society supported
British Authorities.
Hastings (1772-1785)
●  Became governor of Bengal in 1772 and Governor-General in 1773
throught the Regulating Act. ● Abolished Dual system of administration. ●
Wrote introduction to the first English translation of the Gita by Charles
Wilkins. ●  Founded the Asiatic Society of Bengal with William Jones in
1784. ●  Rohilla War (1774) ●  1st Anglo-Maratha War (1776- 1782) ●  2nd
Anglo-Mysore War (1780- 1784). ● Pitt’s India Act, 1784
Lord Cornwallis (1786-1793)
● Separated the revenue administration from the administration of justice. ●
Created post of district judge. ● Introduced Permanent Settlement in Bengal.
● Cornwallis is called the father of civil service in India. ● Fought 3rd Anglo-
Mysore War.
Sir John Shore (1793-1798)
●  Introduced the 1st Charter Act. ●  Planned the permanent settlement and
later succeeded Cornwallis as Governor General. ● Battle of Kharda between
Niazm and the Marathas (1795).
Lord Wellesley (1798-1805)
● Started Subsidiary Alliance system to achieve British paramountcy in India.
First alliance with Nizam of Hyderabad. ●  Madras Presidency was formed
during his tenure. ● 4th Anglo-Mysore War (1799)– defeat and the death of
Tipu Sultan. ● 2nd Anglo-Maratha War, (1803-1805) defeat of the Scindhia,
the Bhonsale and the Holkar. ● Treaty of Bassein (1802).
George Marlow (1805-1807)
● Subsidiary alliance with Holkar by Treaty of Rajpurghat. ● Vellore Mutiny.
● Second Anglo-Maratha War ended.
Lord Minto-I (1807-1813)



● Concluded Treaty of Amritsar with Ranjit Singh (1809). ● Charter Act of
1813 was passed.
Lord Hastings (1813-1823)
● Anglo–Nepalese War (1813- 1823), strife with Pindaris (1817-1818) ● 3rd
Anglo-Maratha War (1817- 1818). Hastings forced humiliating treaties on
Peshwa and the Sindhia. ● Introduced the Ryotwari settlement in Madras by
Thomas Munro, the Governor.
Lord Amherst (1823-1828)
● 1st Burmese War (1824-26). ● Acquisition of territories in Malay
Peninsula. ● Capture of Bharatpur (1826).
GOVERNOR GENERAL OF I NDIA
Lord William Bentick (1828-1834)
● Most liberal and enlightened Governor General of India. ● Regarded as the
Father of Modern Western Education in India. Introduction of English as the
official language. ● Abolished sati and other cruel rites (1829). ● Suppressed
Thuggee (1830), Curbed by Colonel Sleeman. ●  Annexed Mysore (1831),
Coorg (1834), Central Cachar (1834) on the plea of misgovernment.
Concluded a treaty of perpetual friendship with Ranjit Singh.
Sir Charles Metcalfe (1834-1836)
● He is known as the Liberator of Press. ● Passed the Press law
Lord Auckland (1836-1842)
● First Afghan war (1836-1842) ● Treaty with Sikhs and Amirs of Sindh.
Lord Ellenborough (1842-1844)
● Brought an end to Afghan War. ● Annexation of Sindh (1843). ● War with
Gwalior (1843).
Lord Hardinge-I (1844-1848)
●  First Sikh War (1845-1846) ●  Treaty of Lahore (1846) ●  Prohibition of
female Infanticide ● Gave preference to English educated in employment.
Lord Dalhousie (1848-1856)
● Widow Remarriage Act (1856). ● “Wood’s Educational Despatch” of 1854
and opening of Anglo-Vernacular schools and government colleges. ●



Introduced Doctrine of Lapse. Captured Satara (1848), Jaitpur and
Sambhalpur (1849) Baghat (1850), Udaipur (1852), Jhansi (1853) and
Nagpur (1854). ● Fought the Anglo-Sikh War and annexed the whole of the
Punjab. ● 2nd Burmese War (1852) and annexation of Lower Burma or Pegu.
● Annexation of Berar in 1853. ● Annexation of Awadh in 1856. ● Started the
first railway line in 1853 (connecting Bombay with Thana). ● Telegraph and
postal reforms. ● Establishment of separate public works department in every
province.
Lord Canning (1856-1858)
●  Revolt of 1857 ●  He was the last Governor- General of East India
Company. ●  Establishment of three universities at Calcutta, Madras and
Bombay in 1857.
VICEROYS OF INDIA
Lord Canning (1858-1862)
● Passed the Act of 1858, which ended the rule of the East India Company. ●
Withdrew Doctrine of Lapse. ● The Indian Councils Act of 1861 was passed,
which proved to be a landmark in the constitutional history of India. ● The
Indian Penal Code of Criminal Procedure (1859) was passed. ● The Indian
High Court Act (1861) was enacted. ●  Income Tax was introduced for the
first time in 1858. ● ‘White Mutiny’ by European troops in 1859.
Lord Elgin-I (1862-1863)
● Suppressed Wahabi Movement.
Sir John Lawrence (1864-1868)
● High courts were established at Calcutta, Bombay and Madras in 1865. ●
Expanded canal works and railways. ●  Bhutan War (1865). ●  Advocated
State-managed railways. ●  Created the Indian Forests Department and
reorganized the native judical service.
Lord Mayo (1869-1872)
● He established the Rajkot College at Kathiawar and Mayo College at Ajmer
for the Indian princes. ● He organised the Statistical Survey of India. ●  He
established the Department of Agriculture and Commerce. ● He was the only
Viceroy to be murdered in office by a convict in the Andamans in 1872.
Lord Northbrook (1872-1876)



● Kuka rebellion in Punjab (1872) ● Famine in Bihar (1874) ● Visit of Prince
of Wales in 1875. ● Resigned over Afghanistan Question.
Lord Lytton (1876-1880)
● Most unpopular Viceroy. ● Pursued free trade and abolished duties on 29
British manufactured goods which accelerated drain of India. ● Arranged the
Grand Darbar in Delhi (in 1877) when the country was suffering from a
severe famine. ● Passed the Royal Title Act (1876) and Queen Victoria was
declared as the Kaisera- Hind. ●  Arms Act (1878) made it mandatory for
Indians to acquire license for arms. ● Passed the infamous Vernacular Press
Act (1878). ● The second Afghan War (1878-80)
Lord Rippon (1880-1884)
● Repeal of the Vernacular Press Act, 1882. ● The first Factory Act, 1881 to
improve labour condition. ● Resolution on Local Self Government in 1882. ●
Resolution on Land Revenue Policy ●  Appointed Hunter commission (for
education reform) in 1882. ● The Illbert Bill controversy erupted during his
time.
Lord Dufferin (1884-1888)
● Third Burmese War ● Annexation of Burma (1885) ● Congress founded in
1885 ● Bengal Tenancy Act (1885)
Lord Lansdowne (1888-1894)
● The Factory Act of 1891. ● Categorisation of Civil Services into imperial,
provincial and subordinate. ●  Indian Council Act of 1892 (Introduced
elections which was indirect). ● Appointment of the Durand Commission to
define the Durand line between then India and Afghanistan.
Lord Elgin-II (1894-1899)
● The Santhal uprising of 1899. ● Convention delimiting the frontier between
China and India was ratified. ●  Great famine of 1896-1897. ●  Lyall
Commission appointed after famine. ● Assassination of two British officials
by the Chapekar brothers in 1897.
Lord Curzon (1899-1905)
● Appointed a Police Commission in 1902 under Andrew Frazer. ● Set up the
Universities Commission and accordingly the Indian Universities Act of
1904 was passed. ●  Set up the Department of Commerce and Industry. ●



Calcutta Corporation Act (1899). ●  Passed the Indian Coinage and Paper
Currency Act (in 1899) and put India on a gold standard. ●  Partition of
Bengal took place in 1905 ●  Introduced Ancient Monuments Preservation
Act (1904)
Lord Minto-II (1905-1910)
● Swadeshi Movement. ● Foundation of the Muslim League, 1906. ● Surat
session and split in the Congress (1907). ● Newspapers Act, 1908. ● Morely-
Minto Reforms, 1909.
Lord Hardinge-II (1910-1916)
● Annulment of the partition of Bengal. ● Transfer of capital from Calcutta to
Delhi. ●  Durbar in Delhi and Coronation of George-V and Queen. ●
Establishment of Hindu Mahasabha by Madan Mohan Malviya, 1915.
Lord Chelmsford (1916-1921)
● Lucknow Pact in 1916 between Congress and Muslim League. ● Arrival of
Gandhi, and Champaran Satyagraha in 1917. ●  Formation of Home Rule
Leagues by Annie Besant and Tilak (1956) ● Montague’s August Declaration
(1917). ● Saddler Commission of Education in 1917. ● Kheda Satyagraha and
Satyagraha at Ahmedabad in 1918. ●  Government of India Act (1919). ●
Constitutional Refrom of 1919. ● Repressive Rowlatt Act (1919). ● Massacre
at Jalianwala Bagh (1919). ●  Khilafat Movement. ●  Non-Cooperation
Movement. ●  Appointment of S.P. Sinha as governor of Bihar (the first
Indian to become a governor).
Lord Reading (1921-1926)
●  Repeal of Press Act (1910) and Rowlatt Act of 1919. ●  Chauri-Chaura
incident. ● Voilent Moplah rebellion in Kerala (1921) ● CPI founded in 1921.
● Decision to hold simultaneous examinations for the ICS both in Delhi and
London, with effect from 1923. ● RSS founded in 1925. ● Kakori robbery in
1925.
Lord Irwin (1926-1931)
● Simon Commission announced in 1927. ● Butler Commission in 1927. ●
All India Youth Congress, 1928 ● Nehru Report, 1928. ● Murder of Saunders
by Bhagat Singh, Rajguru, and Chandrashekhar Azad (1928) ● Bomb blast in
Assembly Hall of Delhi (1929) by Bhagat Singh and Batukeshwar Dutt. ●
Lahore session of the Congress and Poorna Swaraj declaration. ●  Civil



Disobedience Movement 1930. ●  Dandi March (March 12th, 1930). ●  1st
Round Table Conference, 1930. ● Gandhi-Irwin Pact, March 5, 1931. ● Civil
Disobedience Movement.
Lord Willingdon (1931-1936)
● Second Round Table Conference in September 1931. ● Announcement of
Communal Award (1932). ● ‘Fast unto death’ by Gandhi in Yerwada prison,
broken after the Poona Pact (1932) ● Third Round Table Conference, 1932. ●
Foundation of Congress Socialist Party, 1934. ●  Government of India Act,
1935. ● Burma separated from India, 1935. ● All India Kisan Sabha 1936.
Lord Linlithgow (1936-1944)
●  1st General Election (1936-h 1937). ●  Congress ministries in 1937 and
resignation of Congress ministries in 1939. ● Outbreak of second World War
(1939). ●  Forward Block founded in 1939. ●  Deliverance day by Muslim
League ●  August offer, 1940, Lahore Resolution, 1940. ●  Cripps Mission,
1942. ● Quit India Movement, 1942.
Lord Wavell (1944-1947)
● CR Formula 1944. ● Wavell Plan and Shimla Conference in 1945. ● End of
2nd World War in 1945. ●  INA Trials and the Naval mutiny in 1946. ●
Cabinet Mission, 1946 and acceptance of its proposals by Congress. ●
Observance of ‘Direct Action Day’ (August 16, 1946) by Muslim League. ●
Formation of Interim Government by the congress (September 1946)
Lord Mountbatten (1947-1948)
● Announced the 3 June, 1947 Plan. ● Introduction of Indian Independence
Bill in the House of Commons. ●  Appointment of Two boundary
commissions under Sir Cryil Radcliffe. ●  Last British Viceroy of British
India. ● First Governor-General of Free India.
C. Rajagopalachari (1948-1950)
● Only Indian Governor General ● Last Governor-General of free India.
LAND REVENUE SYSTEM DURING BRITISH RULE
Zamindari System (Permanent Settlement)
● This land revenue system was introduced by Lord Cornwallis in 1973 It
was introduced in provinces of Bengal, Bihar, Orissa and Varanasi.



●  Zamindars were made the owner of the lands and given them rights to
collect the rent from the peasants.
●  The realized amount would be divided into 11 parts. 1/11 of the share
belong to Zamindar and 10/ 11 of the share belongs to East India Company.
Ryotwari System
●  This land revenue system was introduced by Thomas Munro in 1820.
Major areas of introduction include Madras, Bombay, Parts of Assam and
Coorgh provinces of British India.
● In Ryotwari System the ownership rights were handed over to the peasants.
British Government collected taxes directly from the peasants.
● The revenue rates of Ryotwari System were 50% where the lands were dry
and 60% in irrigated land.
Mahalwari System
●  This land revenue system was introduced in 1833 during the period of
William Bentick. It was introduced in central Province, North-West Frontier,
Agra, Punjab, Gangetic Valley, etc of British India.
● In this system, the land was divided into Mahals.
● Each Mahal comprises one or more villages. Owenship rights were vested
with the peasants.
● The Villages committee was held responsible for collection of the taxes.
BOOKS AND WRITERS ASSOCIATED WITH 1857 REVOLTS

Authors Books
S. N. Sen 1857
P. C. Joshi Rebellion, 1857
H. P. Chattopadhyaya Sepoy Mutiny 1857
R.C. Majumdar Sepoy Mutiny and the Revolt of 1857
Maulana Azad Eighteen Fifty Seven
V.D. Savarkar First War of Indian Independence
S. B. Chaudhari Civil Rebellion in the Indian Mutinies, Theories of

Indian Mutiny.
A. T. Embree 1857 in India
 



MAJOR TRIBAL MOVEMENTS : AT A GLANCE
Tribal Area Year Leader

Movement
Chuars W. Bengal 1768-1832 —
Bhils Khandesh 1818-1848 Sevaram
Ho Chota Nagpur 1820-32 —
Kolis Sahyadri Hills 1824-48 —
Khasis Khasi Hills 1829-32 Tirut Singh and

Barmanik
Singh Phos Assam 1830-39 —
Kols Chota Nagpur 1831-32 Budho Bhagat
Koyas Andhra Pradesh 1840-1924 Alluri Sitaram Raju
Kachnagas Chacher (Assam) 1882 Sambhudan
Ahom Assam 1828-33 Gomdhan Kunvar

FOUNDATION OF INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS
●  The architect of Indian National congress was Allan Octavion Hume a
retired English ICS officer, who founded this in December 1885 along with
seventy one other political workers.
● The first meeting of the INC was organised by A.O. Hume at Gokaldas
Tejpal Sanskrit College on December 28th, 1885 in Bombay.
● Hume’s main purpose in encouraging the foundation of the congress was
to provide a ‘safety valve to the growing discontent among the educated
Indians.
● This was a myth and the core of the myth is that a violent revolution was
on the varge at nipped in the bud, by the foundation of the INC.
Swadeshi Movement
● In 1904 the viceroy and the Governer General Lord Curzon announced the
scheme of the partition of Bengal into two separate provinces on the ground
of administrative consideration namely lightening the burden of Bengal, but
the real motive was to curb the growth of national feeling in Politically
advanced Bengal by driving a wedge between the Bengali speaking Hindus



and Muslims and destroying the solidarity of the people of Bengal by
dividing them into two blocks.
● The partition was declared in Shimla in 7 July, 1905.
● The partion took place on 20 July, 1905.
● The people of Bengal organised protest meeting and observed the day of
mourning. The whole political life of Bengal under went a change.
● The anti partition movement culminated into the Swadeshi movement and
spread to other parts of India.
● The aggressive nationalists forced Dada Bhai Naoroji to speak of ‘Swaraj’
in the session of Calcutta in 1906.
Swadeshi Movement
●  This movement involved programmes like the boycott of government’s
service, court, goods, promotion of swadeshi goods, promotion of national
education through the establishing of national schools and colleges.
● Indian National Congress took the swadeshi call first at Banaras session of
1905 presided over by G.K. Ghokhle.
● Lal, Bal, Pal and Arbindo Ghosh played the important role.
●  October 16, 1905 the day of partition formally came into force was
observed as the day of mourning throughout Bengal.
Revolutionary leader with swadeshi movement
1. B.G. Tilak – Mumbai & Pune
2. Ajit Singh – Punjab
3. Lala Lajpat Ray – Uttar Pradesh
4. Sayyid Haider – Delhi Raza
5. Chidambaram – Madras Pillai
●  Ashwani Kumar Datta setup a ‘Swadesh Bandhava Committee’ to flash
the message of this movement.
●  R.N. Tagore set ‘Bengal National College’ for National education.
Aurbindo Ghosh was the Principal of this college.
Tagore wrote a song named ‘Amar Sonar Bangla’ later this song became the
national song of Bangladesh.
Act passed by Government to suppress the Movement
1. Sedition meeting Act, 1907.
2. Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1908.
3. Indian Newspaper Act, 1908.
4. Explosive substances Act, 1908.
5. Indian press Act, 1910.



Leaders & their journals Journal Leader
Journal Leader
Yugantar – Barindra Ghosh
Sanjivini – K. K. Mitra
Bharat Mata – Ajit Singh
Sandhya – B. Upadhyaya
New India – Anne Besent
Calcutta Session of Congress
● Calcutta session of congress was held in 1906 this session was presided
over by Dadabhai Naoroji.
● In this session Naoroji first time used the terms – ‘Swaraj’.
●  Bhupendra Nath Basu was the president of welcome committee of this
session.
The Surat split (1907)
● This session was took place in Surat on the bank of river Tapti under the
presidentship of Ras Bihari Ghosh.
● The INC split into two groups – the extremists and the moderates.
●  Extremists were led by Lal, Bal and Pal while the moderates by G.K.
Gokhale.
●  Controversy rose over the elected president, Ras Bihari Ghosh as
extremists did not accept this.
Extremists wanted Lala Lajpat Rai to be chosen. make Ras Bihari Ghosh as
president of INC Surat session. Due to this congress split into two parts.
Foundation of Muslim League (1906)
● Muslim League setup in 1906 under the leadership of Aga Khan, Nawab
Salimullah of Dhaka and Nawab Mohsin-ul-mulk.
● Vakar-ul-mulk was the first president of Muslim League.
The objective of muslim league :
(i) To promote among Indian Muslim feeling of loyalty towards the British
Government.
(ii) To protect the political and other rights of Indian Muslims and to place
their needs and aspirations before the Government in temperate language.
(iii) The fomation of the muslim league was a great success of British
Government and his policy of ‘Divide & Rule’
Morley-Minto Reforms (1909)



●  After Curzon, Lord Minto became the viceroy of India It envisaged a
separate electorate for Muslims.
the Father of Communal Electorate
● Aimed at dividing the rationalist ranks and at rallying the moderate and the
muslims to the governments side.
●  One Indian (for the first time) was to be appointed to the viceroy’s
executive council.
●  Satyendra Prasad Sinha became the first Indian to join the viceroy’s
Executive Council. He was appointed as the Law member.
Komagata Maru ship Incident (1914)
●  Canada Government was unhappy with the increasing number of India
settlers in Canada.
● Unfortunately no passenger ship in those days sailed directly for Canada
from only India bound ship either from Hongkong or Shangai.
●  Baba Gurdit Singh, a man of affluent means and a contractor of repute
came to rescue of Indians stranded in Hongkong in 1910.
● He hired a Japanese ship Komagatamaru. It reached the fort of vancouver
on 22 May, 1914. These people did not come under the restrainsts of the
Canadian Act.
● Canadian Government did not allow the ship to enter Vancouver hence the
passenger did not get down. after, Komagata maru started returning on 23rd
July.
●  When ship reached Budge- Budge, angry passengers fought with police
many were wounded and died.
The second stage of National Movement
● The main centres of revolutionary movement were three –
1. Maharashtra 2. Bengal 3. Punjab
Maharashtra
● The revolutionary movement was started from Maharashtra in 1897.
●  Tilak’s attempt to propagate militancy among the youth was the Shivaji
and Ganapati Festivals.
● Tilak published journals –Kesari & Maratha.
● By the inspiration of Tilak ‘Acharya Bandhav Committee’ was established
in Maharashtra.
● Chapekar Brothers – Damodar Hari Chapekar & Balkrishna Hari Chapekar
established ‘Vyayama Mandal’ in Pune in 1896-97. Chapekar brothers were



associated with revolutionary institute – ‘Hindu Dharma Sangh’.
● In 22 June, 1897 Chapekar Brothers shot dead plague commissioners Rand
and Amerst in Pune. In 1899 V.D. Savarkar and his brother Ganesh organised
a secret society named – ‘Mitra Mela’. They were co-accused in Nasik and
Gwalior conspiracy cases.
● In 1909 District Magistrate Jackson of Nasik was assassinated by Anant
Lakshman Kanhare.
Home Rule Society and India House and brought out journal named ‘The
sociologist’ in London in 1905.
● Madan Lal Dhingra murdered Curzon Wyllie in 1909.
●  Madam Bhikaji Cama operated from Paris and Geneva and brought out
journal ‘Bande Matram’.
Bengal
●  In Bengal the revolutionary movements was organised by Bhadralok
society.
●  ‘Anushilan committee’ was the first revolutionary Institute in Bengal
which was founded by P. Mitra, Barindra Kumar Ghosh and Bhupendra Nath
Dutta in 24 March, 1903.
● Another Anushilan committee was founded by Pulin Biharidas in Dhaka in
Bangladesh.
●  Many newspapers advocated revolutionary activity like Sandhya by
Brahmabandhav Upadhyaya, Vande Matram by Arbindo Ghosh, Yugantar by
Bhupendra Dutta.
●  In 1907, Avanish Chandra Bhattacharya wrote a bookpresent strategy
(Vartman Ranniti). This book advocated to youths to take military education.
●  In 1908, Praffula Chaki and Khudiram Bose attempted to murder
Muzaffapur Judge kingsford.
●  Praffula Chaki committed suicide and Khudiram Bose was arrested and
hanged on May 11, 1908.
● Aurobindo Ghosh, Varindra Ghosh, Ullas Dutta, Hemchandra Das etc were
involved in this case.
●  Aurobindo Ghosh was released due to lack of evidence after that he
published an English paper ‘Karmyogini’.
● He became saint in course of time and set Ashram in Puducherry.
In 1911 the capital of country was shifted from Calcutta to Delhi. When
British king triumphantly entered the historic city of Delhi Chandani Chowk
a huge ceremonial procession was taken out. As the procession passed



through the crowded ‘bazar of Chandni Chowk suddenly a bomb exploded as
if to crack the sheel of viceroy’s. The bomb missed the target.
● The bomb had been thrown by a great patriot Ras Bihari Bose. He slipped
away quietly.
● Under fictitious name he went away to Japan with R.N. Tagore and raised
INA. Later he handed it over to the leadership of Netaji Subhash Chandra
Bose.
● This incident is known as Delhi conspiracy case. In this case Amirchandra,
Avadh Bihari and Bal Mukund hanged on in Delhi and Basant Kumar in
Ambala.
Punjab
●  In Punjab, the revolutionary activists were Lala Lajpat Rai, Ajit Singh,
Aga Haider Syed Haider Raza, Bhai Parmananda, Lalchand Falak and Sufi
Amba Prasad.
Ghadar Party (1913)
● The Ghadar Party, which began as an association to protect and defend the
rights of Indian settlers in the United States and Canada, later grew into a
movement to liberate the country from alien yoke.
● In 1907 Ramnath Puri established Hindustan Assosiation in San Fransisco
and edited ‘sarkular- i-Ajadi in urdu.
●  The Lucknow session was important not only in that it brought the
moderates and the Extremists together, it also led to an entente between the
congress and the Muslim League.
● On 2nd october, 1911 the partition of Bengal was annulled.
● The Muslims community in India was further disappointed by the hostile
attitude of the British Government towards the sultan of Turkey during the
Tripoli and Balkan wars in 1911, 1912 & 1913.
● They looked upon the Sultan as the Calipha of Islam and did not like that
he should has been humbled by Italy and the Balkan powers through the
connivance of England.
●  The Participation of Turkey in the Great war on the side of Germany
convinced the Indian Muslim that British was not the real friend of Islam.
●  The congress and the league decided to cooperate in formulating a
common scheme of post-war reforms and in pressing its adoption by the
British authorities.
● This session was presided over Ambika Charan Majumdar.
● The architect of congress-league were Jinnah & Tilak.



●  The cooperation of Muslims League was welcomed by INC at karachi
Session in 1913 under the Leadership of Nawab Sayyid Mohammad
Bahadur.
● After Tilak’s return, having served sentence of six years in Mandalay.
● A committee of its members were formed for Home Rule.
●  On the recommendation of this committee Tilak setup Home Rule in
Belgaon in 28 April, 1916.
● Tilak’s League had six branches and restricted to Maharashtra, Karnataka,
Central provinces and Berar. A similar organisation was setup in Madras in
September 1916 by Annie Besant.
●  Annie Besant’s League had 200 branches and covered the rest of the
country, that was not included in Tilak’s League.
● The British authorities became seriously concerned about the Home Rule
Movement in India.
●  Circulars were issued prohibiting school and college boys from
participating in the Home Rule Movement.
Montague Declaration (1917)
● A British policy was announced which aim at increasing association of
Indian in every branch of the administration for progressive realization of
responsible Government in India as an integral part of the ‘British empire’
this came to be the August Declaration or Montague Declaration.
● Moderates called it ‘the Magna Carta of India’.
● Tilak called it ‘Morning Without the Sun’.
The Montague -Chelmsford reforms (1919)
(The Indian council Act 1919) This act was come into force in 1921. The
main provisions of this Act—
●  The Imperial Legislative Council was abolished and in its place a
bicameral legislature, composed of the legislative Assembly and Council of
state, was established.
●  The Indian executive comprised of the Governer -General and his
Executive council. The former was the head of the Executive and distributed
the portfolioes among the executive councillors. the Act was the introduction
of “Dyarchy”, a sort of double government in the province. The provincial
subjects were divided into ‘Reserved’ and ‘Transferred’ subjects. It separated,
for the first time, provincial budgets from the central budget.



● Important departments such as Finance, Police, General Administration etc
were ‘Reserved’ and were to be dealt with by the Governor and his
Executive Council.
less important department called, ‘Transferred’ subject were to be dealt with
by Minister chosen from the elected members of the provincial legislature. It
extended the principle of communal representation by providing separate
electorates for Sikhs, Indian Christians, Anglo-Indians and Europeans.
The Third phase of National Movement
(Ghandhi Era -1919-1947)
●  The third phase of the national movement is called the ‘Ghandhi- Era’.
Gandhiji returned from south Africa to India on 9 Jan, 1915 and joined the
national movement.
●  Here Gandhiji met with Gokhale, The thought of Gokhale influenced
Gandhiji much and he accepted him his political Guru.
●  Gandhiji tried the efficacy of his weapon in India first in Champaran.
Champaran was a district of the Tirhut division of the Bihar province.
●  The tenants of this district were bound by contract to plant trees out of
twenty parts of his land with Indigo for his land lord who, by and large , were
Englishman.
● This system was known as ‘tinkathia system’.
● But when Indigo became unremunerative, the European planters imposed
higher taxes to compensate their loses in the international trade at that time.
● Gandhiji was requested by Rajkumar Shukla to look into the problems of
the Indigo planters.
● Gandhiji was successful in abolishing the tinkathia systems and refund was
made to the cultivators in wages.
Movement of Ahmedabad Mill workers (1918)
● In Ahmedabad the disputes was between the mill owners and workers over
the ‘plague bonus’ which the owner wanted to withdraw once the epidemic
was over.
● Gandhiji requested the mill owners to pay wages but they refused to do so.
● Gandhiji advised the workers to go on strike and explained them what it
meant. Gandhiji advised the workers to go on strike and he undertook hunger
strike after which the mill owners press into accepting the tribunal award of
35% increase in wages. This was the second victory of Gandhiji’s fight for
justice.



Khera Satyagrah (1918)
● Hardly was the Ahmedabad mill strike over, that his attention was drawn
to the deplorable plight of the Peasants of Khera district, in Bombay
province. were in extreme distress due to a failure of crops and the
government ignored their appeals for the remission of land revenue.
● The peasants of Khera were already hard pressed because of Plague, high
prices and draught.
●  Due to Gandhiji’s effort, the government bound and a compromise was
made between them.
●  Indulal Yagnik and Sardar Patel took leading role in movement with
Gandhiji.
Rowlatt Act (1919)
● The 1919 sedition committee headed by justice Rowlatt led to the Rowlatt
Act. where by war time restrictions of civil rights were to be made permanent
by—
(a) System of Special court
(b) Detention without trial for maximum 2 years.
(c) Greater police power.
● This act authorized the government to imprison any person without trial
and conviction of the court of law. It was first countrywide agitation by
Gandhiji and marked the foundation of non-cooperation movement.
●  During March and April 1919, the country witnessed a remarkable
political awakening in India.
● This Act was criticized as ‘Black Act.’
● This act was called ‘Bina Apeel Bina Daleel Bina Vakil’.
Jallianwala Bagh Tragedy (13 April, 1919)
●  A meeting was called in to oppose the detention of Dr Satyapal &
Kitchlew.
● As soon as the proceedings commenced, Dyer ordered the troops to fire.
‘till the ammunition exhausted.”
● Due to this massacre, R. N. Tagore returned ‘Knighthood’ and Shankaran
Nair resigned from the executive council of viceroy.
● Government setup enquiry commission under the chairmanship of Hunter
hence known as ‘Hunter commission’.
●  On March 13, 1940 Sardar Udham Singh killed O’Dyer when he was
addressing a meeting in caxton hall, London. Udham Singh took the revenge



of Jallianwala massacre by killing O’Dyer.
Khilafat Movement (1920)
●  In the first world war, Turkey, which had joined the Axis powers was
defeated by the Allied powers. When the war ended the victorious Allied
powers took a very stern attitude towards Turkey and finally dismembered
the once mighty Turkish ottoman empire.
● The sultan of Turkey who was also the Khalif was deposed.
●  Much resentment was expressed by the Indian Muslims against the
deposition of the Sultan of Turkey and dismemberment of his empire.
● An all India Khilafat Conference under the chairmanship of Gandhiji met
in Delhi and resolved to withdraw all cooperation with the Government until
the Khilafat demands were redeemed.
● An all India Khilafat committee was also setup to organise mass support
for Muslims cause.
● On 17 october, 1919, ‘Khilafat day’ was celebrated.
● Gandhiji suggested khilafat committee to start non cooperation movement.
Committee accepted the suggestion.
The Non-Cooperation Movement (1920-21) It was the first mass - based on
political movement under Gandhiji. Gandhiji launched this movement on 1
August, 1920. It was based on three demands–
(i) The Khilafat issue. (ii) Justice for Jallianwala Bagh Massacre (iii) Issue of
self Rule.
●  The Tilak Swaraj Fund was started to finance the non-cooperation
movement.
● C. R. Das and Moti Lal Nehru gave up their legal practices.
● Subhash Chandra Bose resigns from the civil services.
● During this movement the Prince of Wales visited India and were greeted
with strikes and demonstrations.
Chauri-Chaura Incident (1922)
● at Chauri-Chaura in Gorakhpur district of Uttar Pradesh on 5 February,
1922. The mob burnt 22 policemen. Gandhiji shocked with this incident.
●  This incident compelled Gandhiji to withdraw the non-cooperation
movement on February 12, 1922. inorder to isolate Mahatma Gandhi from
the masses, the British authorities put him under arrest on March 13, 1922.
Swaraj Party (1923)



● Motilal Nehru, C.R. Das and N.C. Kelkar demanded that the nationalists
should end the boycott of the legislative council, enter them and expose them
but the No Changers like Rajendra Prasad and Rajgopalachari ordered to the
Gandhi’s Programme of boycott of legislatures.
● The Pro-changers formed the Swaraj Party On Jan 1, 1923, contested the
elections and embarrassed the government by opposing its measures.
●  In the elections of 1923 the Das- Nehru group under the banner of the
Swaraj Party emerged the single largest party in the central Assembly,
Bombay and Bengal Councils.
● The swarajists pursued an obstructionist strategy to defeat all proposals for
legislative enactments.
The Simon Commission (1927-28)
● In 1927, the British decided to appoint a commission to recommend further
constitutional reforms.
● This commission was under the chairmanship of Simon.
● During the time of Simon commission Lord Irwin was the viceroy of India.
● All the members of this commission were the british that’s why congress
opposed this and called it white commission.
and his colleagues landed in Bombay and were greeted with hatrals and
black-flag demonstrations.
● In protest to Simon Commission Lala Lajpat Rai Succumbed to injuries on
Oct 30, 1929.

Nehru Report (1928) It remained memorable as the first major Indians
effort to draft a constitutional framework for India complete with lists of
central and provincial subjects and fundamental rights. It demanded
responsible government both in the centre and in the province , but it
advocated Dominion Status and not complete independence.
● The report recommended equal rights for women, freedom to form unions
and dissociation of the state from religion.
●  The committee comprised Tej Bahadur Sapru, Ali Imam M.S. Aney,
Mangal Singh, Sohaib Qureshi, G.R. Pradhan and Subhash Chandra Bose.
The Lahore Session of the Congress (1929)
● On December, 1929, INC declared ‘Purna Swaraj’ at Lahore session under
the chairmanship of J.L. Nehru.
● Decision taken at Lahore Session —



(i) Round table conference to be boycotted. aims of congress.
(iii) Launch programme of civil disobedience including non payment of
taxes.
(iv) All members of legislatures asked to resign their seats.
● On December 31, 1929, the newly adopted tricolour flag was unfurled and
January 26, 1930 was fixed as the first independence day which was to be
celebrated every year.
Civil Disobedience Movement
● Civil Disobedience Movement began with Dandi March by Gandhi on 12
March, 1930. The breaking of salt laws on 6 April, 1930 formally
inaugurated the Civil Disobedience Movement.
● Salt law violated in many parts of the country.
● The movement reached the extreme North-Western frontier province under
the leadership of Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan.
● Surya Sen’s Chittagong Revolt Group carried out a raid on two armouries
and declared the establishement of a provisional government.
● In Sholapur (Maharashtra) Textile workers went on a strike, burnt liquor
shop, railway stations, Municipal building, law courts and declared the
establishment of paralled government.
● In Bihar chowkidari tax were refused.
● Forest law breached in central region of the country.
● In Manipur Rani Gaidinliu raised the banner of revolt against foreign rule.
Round Table Conferences
1st Round Table conference (1930) It was the first conference arranged
between the British and Indians as equals. It was held on Nov. 12, 1930 in
London to discuss Simon Commission. Congress and most business leaders
were kept away
Gandhi -Irwin Pact (1931)
● Tej Bahadur Sapru, M.R. Jayakar and Srinivas Shashtri initiated efforts to
break the ice between Gandhiji and the Governments. The two signed a pact
on March 5, 1931.
● Gandhiji agreed to suspend Disobedience movement and agreed to join the
2nd round table conference.
● The government on its part released the political prisoners and conceded
the right to make salt for consumption for villages along the coast and



withdrawal of emergency ordinances.
2nd Round Table conference (1931)
● Ramsay Macdonald was the Prime Minister of Britain.
● Gandhiji demanded control over defence and foreign affairs.
● Hindu Mahasabha demanded federal responsibility, which was opposed by
muslim league and the princess.
● Ambedkar demanded separate electorates for Dalits, which was opposed
by Gandhiji.
●  The government refused to concede the basic nationalist demand of
freedom on the basis of immediate grant of dominion status.
Communal Award and Poona Pact (1932)
●  On August the 1932 Mac Donald announced the proposal on minority
representation, known as the ‘Communal Award’ which recommended —
(i) To double the existing seats in provincial legislatures.
(ii) To retain the system of separate electorate for the minorities.
(iii) To grant weightage to muslims in provinces where they were in
minority.
● The Communal Award declared the depressed classes also be minorities
and entitled them to separate electorates.
● Gandhiji was in Yervada jail at that time. He started fast upto death against
it.
Poona Pact (Sep 25, 1932)
●  Gandhi started fast from the jail due to given the right of separate
electorates to the Depressed class.
● He regarded the Depressed classes as an integral part of Hindu society.
● In an anxiety to save his life, the Poona Pact with the following Gandhiji
and Ambedkar.
(i) 148 seats were to be allotted to the depressed classes in the Provincial
legislatures as against 71 promised by the communal Award and 18% of the
total in central legislature.
(ii) Ambedkar to accepted the principle of joint electorate.
● Leamders like Madan Mohan Malaviya, M.C. Rajah and B.R. Ambedkar
became active to settle issue.
● Harijan upliftment now become the principal concerns of Gandhiji.
●  An All-India anti untouchability league was started in September, 1932
and a weekly ‘Harijan’.



● He decided to begin a 21 day fast for the Purification of himself and his
associates for the Harijan Cause.
Third Round table conference (November 1932)
●  The third round table conference met in London in November 1932
congress boycotted it. It was attended by a much smaller number of
representative than before.
Resignation of the congress Ministries-
● Lord Linlithgow declared India to be at war without the prior assent of the
central legislature.
● The congress ministries gave the resign.
●  The muslim league celebrated the ‘Deliverance Day’ on the day of the
resignation of the congress ministries in the provinces.
August Declaration (August 8, 1940)
● With the outbreak of world war II in September 1939 and India’s automatic
involvement in it without consultation, the Indian National Congress
demanded a clearcut definition of the British Government’s war and peace
aims as aplicable to India.
● Lord Linlithgow put forward a proposal that included —
(i) Dominion status in the unspecified future. constitution.
(iii) Expansion of governor -General’s council with representation of the
Indians.
(iv) Establishing a war advisory council.
(v) Made consent of minorities necessary for adoption of future constitution.
(indirectly veto power given to Muslim League)
The Demand for Pakistan (1940)
● In 1930, Iqbal suggested that the frontier province, Baluchistan, Sindh and
Kashmir be made the Muslim state within the federation. Choudhary Rehmat
Ali gave the term Pakistan in 1933.
● Muslim league first passed the proposal of separate Pakistan in its Lahore
session in 1940.
Individual Satyagraha (October 1940)
● The rejection of the congress demands once again exasperated the congress
as well as Gandhiji.
● On 13th October the congress working committee met in Wardha where
Gandhiji unfolded his plan of individual civil disobedience.
● England was facing the most critical hour of her life



●  By starting a mass movement Gandhiji did not like to embarrass the
Government. So, he dicided to offer individual Satyagrah simply with a view
to register his mild protest against the uncompromising attitude of the
Government.
● Gandhiji selected his disciple Vinoba Bhave to inaugurate the movements.
He stood delivering anti-war speeches and was arrested for four days.
Cripps’ Proposals (March, 1942)
● After the fall of Rangoon to the Japanese the British decided to send the
cripps mission to India for constitutional proposals, which included.
(i) Dominion status to be granted after the war.
(ii) Setting up a constitutional making for India after the war whose members
would be elected by the provincial assemblies and nominated by the rulers in
case of the princely states.
(iii) Defence of India would remain in British hands and the governor
general’s powers would remain intact.
(iv) Gandhiji stated cripps proposal as “post-dated cheque on a crashing
bank”.
Quit India Movement (1942)
●  Quit India resolution was passed on August 8, 1942 at Gowalia Tank,
Bombay.
● Gandhiji told the British to quit ‘Leave Indian in God’s hand’. His massage
was ‘Do or Die.’ It was the only all India movement, which was leaderless. In
many areas, the government lost all control and the people established
swaraj.
●  Ram Manohar Lohia, Aruna Asaf Ali, Achyut Patwardhan and
Jayaprakash Narayan emerged as leader.
● Usha Mehta started underground Radio.
●  The movement did not envoke much response from the merchant
community. They had profited heavily during the war.
The parallel Governments
● Parallel governments were established.
I. Satara — under Nana Patil II. Tamluk Jatiya Sarkar Midhapur, West
Bengal — under Satish Samant. III. Balia — under Chittu Pandey IV. Katak
— under Lakshman Nayak.
The Indian National Army
● After releasing from jail Bose was kept in his home in Calcutta.



From there they escaped secretly 14 Jan, 1941 and finally reached Berlin via
Kabul, and Moscow on March 28, 1941.
● Bose was well received by Ribben trop, the foreign minister of Germany,
that he would broadcast anti-British propaganda from Berlin and raise free
Indian units from Indian prisoners of war in Germany.
●  The Idea of the Indian National Army to liberate India was originally
conceived by Rasbihari Bose, who fled to Japan in 1915 and had become a
Japanese citizen, with the help of Mohan Singh, an Indian officer of the
British India Army in Malaya.
● Later Rasbihari Bose handed over the chairmanship of INA to S.C. Bose.
Rani Lakshmi Bai Regimenl was established by Lakshmi Swaminathan.
● INA had three fighting brigade – Gandhi brigade, Nehru brigade & Azad
brigade. Rani Jhansi brigade was an exclusive women force.
● S.C. Bose gave a call from Jubilee place of Rangoon. “You give me blood
and I will give you freedom”.
●  INA won Andaman and Nicobar Island on December 1943, and named
them ‘Shahid’ and ‘Swaraj’ respectively.
●  Abid Husain escaped Gandhi Brigade from the British Army. He was
given a title‘Sardar-A-Jung’ by S.C. Bose for his daring work.
INA Trials
● INA trials were held at Red Fort, Delhi.
● P. K. Sehgal, Shah Nawaj and Gurbaksh Singh Dhillon were put on trial at
the Red Fort.
● The congress took up their defence.
● Bhula bai Desai, Tejbahadur Sapru, J.L. Nehru, K.N. Katju and Arun Asaf
Ali appeared for the defence.
● Muslim league also joined the countrywide protest.
● Wavell used veto power and set them free.
● November 12, 1945 was celebrated as the INA Day.
Wavell Plan (4 June, 1945)
● This plan was given by Viceroy Wavell.
●  The plan was that with the exception of the governor-general and the
commander-in-chief, all members of the executive council were to be
Indians.
● Caste Hindus and Muslims were given equal representation in assembly.
● Simla conference was convened in this regard but was rejected by Jinnah.



● Governor had veto power.
● Foreign matters were given to Indians, but not tribals and border related
areas.
● This was proposed by wavell.
Revolt of the Royal Army (1946)
● 18 February, 1946, Bombay Ratings of HMIS Talwar struck work due to
flagrant racial discrimination unpalatable food and abuse by superior
officers. After the arrest of B. C. Dutt who has scrawled ‘quit India’ on the
ship mutinied.
● Their demands included release of all political prisoners, including those
belonging to the Indian National Army.
● After the government’s assurance they surrendered.
Cabinet Mission (1946)
● Cabinet Mission reached Delhi on 24 March, 1946.
● Three members were there in the Mission –
(i) Pethick Lawrence (ii) Stafford Cripps (iii) A.V. Alexander
● On May 16, 1946 the mission put forward its proposal.
● Rejection of the demand for a full fledged Pakistan.
● Provincial legislatures would elect a constituent Assembly. The members
were divided into three sections.
●  All these sections would have the authority to draw up. Provincial
constitutions and even group constitutions.
Section - A : Non muslim majority provinces.
Section - B : Muslim Majority provinces in the north -west
Section - C : Muslim majority provinces in north-east.
legislatures were to be decided by a single majority in both communities.
● Provinces were to have full autonomy and residual powers.
●  Princely states were no longer to be under paramountcy of British
Government.
● Both congress and Muslim league accepted it.
● The elections of the constituent assembly were held in July 1946.
The congress got 209 of the total 273 seats.
●  Based on Cabinet mission Plan, an interim government consisting of
congress nominees was formed on 2 September, 1946 J.L. Nehru was the
vicepresident and the Governer general remained as its president.



● Muslim league did not joined it initially but finally wavell succeeded in
having five members of the league join the government on 26 October, 1946.
●  Jinnah was alarmed at the results of the elections because the muslim
league was in danger of being totally eclipsed in the constituent Assembly.
● Therefore muslim league withdraw its acceptance of the cabinet mission
plan on 29 July, 1946.
●  Cabinet mission returned on 29 June, 1946. It pass a ‘Direct action’
resolution. Jinnah celebrated ‘Pakistan Day’ on May 27, 1947.
Lord Attlee’s Declaration (1947)
● British Goverment decided to quit Inda by a fix date (30 June, 1948) Mr.
Attlee made an announcement in the House of commons on February 20,
1947.
Mountbatten Plan (3 June, 1947)
● Lord Mountbatten was sworn in as Governor General on 24, March, 1947.
his plan which taken the steps for the solution of India’s political problem.
Outlines are —
● India to be divided into India and Pakistan.
●  Bengal and Punjab will be partitioned and a referendum in NWFP and
sylhet district of Asam would be held.
● There would be a separate constitutional Assembly for Pakistan to frame
its constitution.
● Princely states would enjoy the liberty to join either in Pakistan or India or
remain independent.
● August 15, 1947 was the date to hand over power to India and Pakistan.
Indian Independence Act (1947)
● On 18 July the British Partiment passed ‘Independence of India Act, 1947.
This act was implemented on August 15, 1947.
● Sovereignty of British parliament was abolished. Dominions of India and
Pakistan were created.
● Abolished the office of Viceroy and provided, a governor general for each
dominion.
● At the time of independence there were 562 small and big princely states in
India. Kashmir, Hyderabad and Junagarh and Signed the instrument of
Accession with India, Bhawalpur with Pakistan.
● Goa, Daman and Diu and Dadra and Nagar Haveli were under control of
portuguese and pondicherry under french domination.



 



Flow-Chart of Popular Movement during freedom Tribal Movements
Tribal Area Year Leader

Movement
Khonds Odisha 1846-1914 Chattre Bisayi
Santhals Rajmahal hills 1855-56 Siddhu and Kanhu
Naikadas Gujarat 1858-68 Rup Singh and Jogia

Bhagat
Mundas Chota Nagpur 1899-1900 Birsa Munda
Konda Dora Visakhapatnam 1900 Korra Mallaya
Bhils South Rajasthan 1913 Govind Guru
Oraons Chota Nagpur 1914-1915 Jatra Bhagat
Rampa Andhra Pradesh 1916 Alluri Sitaram Raju
Kukis Manipur 1917-19 Jadonang and Rani

Gaidiniliu
Chenchus Nallamalla Hills 1921-22 Motilal Tejawat
Kherwar Jharkhand — Bhagirath

Social Movements
Movement/ Year Place Founder Objectives

Organisation
Brahmo 1828 Calcutta Raja Ram Propagated monotheism,
Samaj (earlier Mohan Roy opposed incarnation, sacrifr-
Atmiya ices, existence of priests,
Sabha) idolatry, superstition and sati

practices, Sought for reforms
in Hindu society.

Young (1826- Calcutta Henry Louis Opposed the vices in society,
Bengal 1831) Vivian believed in truth, freedom and

Derozio reason
Dharma 1830 Calcutta Radha Kanta Opssposed to liberal
Sabha Deva



and radical reforms, including
Sati.

Namdhari/ 1841- N.W.F. Bhai Balak A politico-religious movement
Kuka 1871 Pro- Singh and of the Sikhs
Movement vince Baba Ram

Singh
Rahanumai 1851 Bombay S.S. Bangali, Founded for the restoration of
Mazdayasan Dadabhai Zoro- astrian religion to its
Sabha Naoroji pristine glory and social

Naoroji regeneration of the Parsi
Furdonji, community through modern
J.B. Nacha, education and emancipation of
etc. women.

Radha Swami 1861 Agra Tulsi Ram Belief in one Supr- me Being,
Satsang also known religious unity, emphasis on

as Shiv simplicity of social life and
Dayal Saheb social service.

Prarthana 1867 Bombay Atmaram Worship and reform of society
Samaj Pandurang through emphasis on

Govind monotheism, uplift of women
Ranade and abolition of caste

discrimination.
Indian 1870 Calcutta Keshab To create public opinion
Reform Chandra Sen against child marriages and for
Association legalising the Brahmo form of

civil marriage. To promote the
intellectual and social status of
Indian women.

The Theosop- 1875 New Madam H.P. Drew inspiration from
hical Society York (In Blavatsky, Upanishads, Philosophy of the

India Col. H.S. Vedanta, etc to aim at religious
Adyar, Olcott (In revival and social reform.
Madras) India-Annie

Besant)



Deccan 1884 Pune M.G. To contribute to the cause of
Education Ranade, V. education and culture in
Society G. Chib- Western India. The Society

donkar, G. founded the Ferguson College,
G. Agarkar, Pune in 1885.
etc.

Seva Sadan 1885 Bombay Behramji M. Campaign against child
Malabari marriages and enforced

widowhood and care for
socially exploited women.

Indian 1887 Bombay M.G. To focus attention on matters
National Ranade and relating to social reforms.
Social Raghunath
Conference Rao
Deva Samaj 1887 Lahore Shiva Narain Religious ideas closer to

Agnihotri Brahmo Samaj. Impressed
upon its followers to follow
social code of conduct and
ethics, such as not to accept
bribe, indulge in gambling,
consume intoxicants and non-
vegetarian food.

Madras 1892 Madras Viresalingam A social purity movement
Hindu Pantalu concerned with the plight of
Association widow and to combat the

Devadasi System.
Ramakrishna 1897 Bengal Vivekananda Sought to revive Hinduism
Mission based on ancient India’s

religious texts and concepts
(eg. Vedanta, etc); against
caste restrictions,

Bharat 1902 Varanasi Pandit Orginisation of the orthodox
Dharma Madan Hindus,
Mahamandala Mohan

Malaviya



The Servants 1905 Bombay Gopal To work for social reforms and
of India Krishna to train "national missionaries
Society Gokhale for the service of India”.
Poona Seva 1909 Pune G.K. Women Empowerment
Sadan Devadhar

and Ramabai
& Ranade

Nishkam 1910 Pune Dhondo Educational progress
Karma Keshav
Math   Karve of women, improving widows

condition. Founded
Social 1911 Bombay Narayan Improving the con- tion of the
Service Malhar Joshi common masses, opened
League schools and librar-

MUSLIM SOCIO-RELIGIOUS REFORM MOVEMENTS AND
ORGANISATIONS

Movement/ Year Place Founder Objectives
Organisation
Faraizi or 1804 Faridpur, Haji To rid the Muslim society of
Faraidi Bengal Shariatullah non Islamic social customs,
Movement and dadu rituals and practices.

Miya Antilandlord and antiBritish
movement.

Taayuuni 1839 Dacca Karamati Opposed to the Faraizi
Movement Ali Jaunpur movement and supported the

British rule.
Dar-ul-ulum 1867 Deoband Muhammad To improve the spiritual and
(A school of Qasim moral conditions of
Islamic Nanautavi
Theology at   Ahmad Indian Muslims. This
Deoband, Gangohi movement supported the INC
Sharanpur, and was opposed to the pro-
U.P.) British Aligarh movement.



Aligarh 1875 Aligarh Sir Syed Liberalisation of Indian Islam
Movement Ahmad and modernisation of Indian

Khan Muslims through religious
reinterpretation, social reform
and modern education.

Ahmadiya 1889- Qadiani Faridkot Mirza Ghulam be lieved in the
Movement 90 Punjab Ahmad of universal religion of all

Qadiyan humanity, opposed to Islamic
orthodoxy and spread of
western liberal education
among Indian Muslims.

Nadwatul 1894- Lucknow Maulana To reform the tra- ditional
Ulama 95 Shibli Islamic system of education, to

strengthen Hindu-Muslim unity
and to arouse nationalism
among Indian Muslims.

LOWER CASTE MOVEMENTS AND ORGANISATIONS
Movement/ Year Place Founder Objectives

Organisation
Satya 1873 Mahara Jyotiba Opposed to untouchability,
Shodhak shtra Phule Priestly of Brahmin
Samaj domination, belief in social

equality and uplift of the
lower castes by educating
them.

Aravippuram 1888 Aravip- Shri Opposed to religious
Movement puram, Narayan disabilities against lower

Kerala Guru castes, believed in social
(18561928) equality, attacked Brahmin

of lower castes by educating
them. Demanded free entry
of the people of lower castes
to the temples.

Shri Narayan 1902- Kerala Shir launched the temple entry



Dharma 03 Narayan movement.
 

Paripalana 1906 Bombay and  
Yogam or Kumaran
S.N.D.P. Asan
Movement V.R.
The Shinde
Depressed
Class Mission 1910 Satara, Mukund Opposed to the exploitation
Society Rao of the lower castes by the
Bahujan upper caste Brahmins,
Samaj landlords, merchants and

moneylenders.
 

Justice 1915- Mahara Patil A movement of the
(Party) 16 shtra C.N. intermediate castes.
Movement Madras, Mudaliyar
Depressed 1924 Bombay P. Opposed to Brahmin
Cla- sses Tyagaraja predominance in education,
Welfare Chetti service and politics.
Institute Dr. B. R.
(Bahis- kirt
Hitkarini
Sabha
 
Self-Respect 1925 Madras Ambedkar Demanded constitutional
Movement E. V. safeguards for the depressed

Rama- classes.
swami Anti-Brahmin and Hindu
Naicker orthhodoxy radical

movement, which advocated
wedding without priests,
forcible temple entry, total
defiance of Hindu social



laws and also theism at
times.
 

Harijan 1932 Pune ‘Periyar’ An all-India organi- sation
Sevak Sangh Mahatma for the removal of untouch-

Gandhi ability and all social
discriminations against
untouchables and other
lower castes. To provide
medical, educational and
technical facilities to
untouchables.

Faqir 1776 Majnum Bengal Nil
Uprising 1777 Shah, Devi

Chaudhrani
Sanyasi 1770  Bengal The immediate cause was
Uprising 1820 the restrictions imposed

upon pilgrims visiting holy
places.

Pagal Panthis 1825- Tipu Shah, North Resentment of peasants
50 Karam East against oppression of

Shah Zamin- dars
Wahabi 1820- Syyaid North To revive and rest- ore
Movement Ahmed of West, Muslim power in India by

Rae Bareli Central overthrowing the Sikhs and
India the British

Kuka Revolt 1860 Jawahar Punjab In about 1840, its aim was to
1870 Mal, Ram purify the sikh religion, after

Singh the conquest of Pujab by the
British. The revival of Sikh
sovereignty become their
chief programme.

Ramosi 1822 Chittur Satara In protest against heavy
Uprising 1825 Singh assessment of land revenue



and very harsh methods of
its collection. In 18251826
again rose in rebellion on
account of acute famines
and scarcity in Pune.

Gadkari 1844  Kolhapur Against arbitrary methods of
Uprising land revenue collection and

then dismissal from service.
Sawantwadi 1844 Phond  Appointment of a British
Revolt Sawant, administrator. To drive away

Anna the British. The revolt later
Sahib transformed into a popular

movement.
Revolt of 1808 Velu Travancore Against the British attempts
Velu Thampi 1809 Thampi to remove the Dewan-ship

and the heavy burden
imposed on the state through
the subsidiary Alliance
system.

PEASANT MOVEMENTS
Movement Place Year Leaders

Titu Mir’s Movement Bengal (1782- Mir Nithar Ali/Titu Mir
1831)

Indigo Revolt Bengal 1859 Bishnu and Digambar
Biswas

Pabna Bengal 1870 Ishwar Roy, Sabu Pal,
Khoodi Mollah

Deccan Riots Maharashtra 1875 Vasudev Balwant Phadke
Ramosi Movement Maharashtra 1879 Vasudev Balwant Phadke
Bijolia Rajasthan 1913 Sitaram Das, Vijay Pathak

Singh
Champaran Bihar 1917 Gandhiji



Kheda Gujarat 1918 Vallabh Bhai Patel and
Gandhiji

Awadh Kisan Sabha Uttar Pradesh 1920 Baba Ramchandra
Eka Movement Awadh 1921 Madari Pasi
Moplah Kerala 1921 Sayyad Ali and Saiyed

Fazl
Bardoli/Borsad Gujarat 1928 Vallabh Bhai Patel
Forest Satyagrah South India 1931 N V Rama Naidu, N G

Ranga
Tebhaga Bengal 1946  
Telangana Andhra 1946  
POLITICAL AND NATIONALIST ORGANISATIONS OF MODERN
INDIA

Year Organisation Founder Place
1838 Landholders Society Dwarikanath Tagore Calcutta
1839 British India Society Willian Adams London
1843 British India Society — Calcutta
1851 British India Association Devendranath Tagore Calcutta
1852 Madras Native Association — Madras
1852 Bombay Association Jagannath Shankar Bombay
1862 London India committee C. P. Mudaliar London
1866 East India Association Dadabhai Nauroji London
1872 Indian Society Anand Mohan Bose London
1876 Indian Association Anand Mohan Bose, Calcutta

S.N. Banerjee
1883 Indian National Society Shishir Chandra Bose Calcutta
1884 Indian National Conference S. N. Banerjee Calcutta



1885 Bombay Presidency F. S. Mehta and K. T. Bombay
Association Telang

1888 United India Patriotic Sir Syed Ahmad Khan Aligarh
Association

1905 Servants of India Society G. K. Gokhale Bombay
1906 Muslim League Aga Khan, Nawab Dhaka

Salimullah and
Mohsin- ul-Mulk

1915 Hindu Mahasabha Madan Mohan Uttar Pradesh
Malviya

1916 Home rule league B. G. Tilak and Annie Pune and
Besant Adyar

1918 U. P. Kisan Sabha M. M. Malviya, Gauri Lucknow
Shankar and Indra
Narayan

1920 Communist Party of India M. N. Roy Tashkent
1920 Indian Trade Union N. M. Joshi (founder) Lucknow

Congress Lala Lajpat Rai
(President)

1923 Swaraj Party Moti Lal Nehru & C. Delhi
R. Das

1924 All India Communist Party Satyabhakta Kanpur
1925 Rashtriya Swayamsevak K. B. Hedgewar Nagpur

Sangha
1926 Naujawan Sabha Bhagat Singh, Yashpal Lahore
1927 All Women Conference Lady Sadashiva lyer Madras
1928 Hindustan Socialist Bhagat Singh, B- Delhi

Republican Association Vohra, B.K. Singh
1928 Labour Swaraj Party Qazi Nazrul Islam —
1929 Khudai Khidmatgar Abdul Gaffar Khan Peshawar



1934 Congress Socialist Party Acharya Narendra Dev  
and Jaiprakash
Narayan

1936 Progressive Writers Group Munshi Prem Chand Lucknow
1936 All India Kisan Sabha Sahjananda and N.G. Lucknow

Ranga
1939 Forward Block Subhash Chandra Bose Calcutta
1939 India Party Bolshevik N. D. Majumdar Calcutta
1940 Radical Democratic Party M. N. Roy Calcutta
1941 Indian Bolshevik Lenin Ajit Rai and Indrasen Calcutta

Party
1942 Revolutionary Socialist Satyendra Nath Tagore Calcutta

Party



ANNUAL SESSIONS OF THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS
Year Place President  

1885 Bombay W. C. Banerjee At Gokuldas Tejpal Sanskrit
College Bombay 72
delegates

1886 Calcutta Dadabhai Nauroji 436 delegates
1887 Madras Badruddin Tayyabji Tayyabji became first

Muslim President
1888 Allahabad George Yule George Yule became first

English President
1889 Bombay William Congress represented all

Wedderburn areas of British India
1890 Calcutta F. S. Mehta Decision taken to organise a

session of Congress in
London

1891 Nagpur P. Anand Charlu  
1892 Allahabad W. C. Banerjee  
1893 Lahore Dadabhai Nauroji  
1894 Madras Mr. Alfred Webb  
1895 Poona S. N. Banerjee Demand for a representative

body only for educated class
1896 Calcutta M. A. Sayani  
1897 Amravati M.C. Sankaran  
1898 Madras A. M. Bose Social reform was set as the

main goal
1899 Lucknow Ramesh C. Dutt.  



1900 Lahore H. G. Chandavarkar  
1901 Calcutta Dinshaw E. Wacha  
1902 Ahmadabad S. N. Banerjee  
1903 Madras Lal Mohan Ghosh  
1904 Bombay Henry Cotton  
1905 Varanasi Gopal Krishna Expressed resentment

Gokhale against the partition of
Bengal.

1906 Calcutta Dadabhai Nauroji Word Swaraj was first used
from congress platform.

1907 Surat Ras Bihari Ghosh Congress split
1908 Madras Ras Bihari Ghosh Constitution for the

Congress
1916 Lucknow Ambika Charan Congress merger, Pact with

Majumdar Muslim League, Gandhi
attended

1917 Calcutta Annie Besant Annie Besant became first
women President

1920 Calcutta Lala Lajpat Rai Gandhian programme was
(suspended) adopted. Change in

Congress Constituion

 Nagpur C. Vijayraghava Hasrat Mohani demanded
Chariar (Annual) for complete independence.

1921 Ahmedabad C. R. Das (in Formation of Swaraj Party
prision) Hakim
Ajaml Khan
(acting)

1924 Belgaum Mahatma Gandhi Only session presided over
by Gandhiji



1925 Kanpur Sarojini Naidu Sarojini Naidu became first
Indian women President

1927 Madras M. A. Ansari Nehru and S C Bose moved
resolution for independence
and it was passed for the 1st
time

1928 Calcutta Motilal Nehru First All India Youth
Congress

1929 Lahore Jawaharlal Nehru Poorna Swaraj Resolution
and pledge for Independence
day on 26 January 1930

1931 Karachi Vallabbhai Patel Resolution for Fundamental
Rights and National
Economic Policy Passed

1934 Bombay Rajendra Prasad Formation of Congress
Socialist Party

1936 Lucknow Jawaharlal Nehru Support for socialism
through democracy

1937 Faizpur Jawaharlal Nehru Demand for Constituent
Assembly

1938 Haripura Subhash Chandra Poorna Swaraj was to cover
Bose also princely states

1939 Tripuri Subhash Chandra S C Bose resigned due to
Bose (later differenece with Gandhi
Rajendra Prasad)

1948 Jaipur Pattabhi  
Sitarammayya

SECRET REVOLUTIONARY SOCIETIES
Socity/Organisation Year Founder Features

Anushilan Samiti 1902 Pulin Das Earliest Secret
Dacca   Society in Bengal



Mitra Mela Maharashtra 1902 V. D. Savarkar Earliest Secret
Society

Abhinav Bharat 1904 Ganesh Ganesh was the
(Maharashtra)  Savarkar elder brother of

(Calcutta)  Ghosh & P. V.D. Savarkar
Mitra

Hindustan 1924 Sachindra It was an all India
Republican  Sanyal & level organisation

Association (HRA)  J. Chatterjee  
FAMOUS CASES

Case Date Accused
Nasik conspiracy 1909-1910 Vinayak Savarkar
Alipore Case 1908 Aurobindo Ghosh
Hawrah Case 1910 Jatin Mukherjee
Dacca Case 1910 Pulin Das
Delhi Case 1915 Amir Chand, Awadh Bihari and Bal

Mukund
Lahore Case 1929-1930 Bhagat Singh, Rajguru and

Sukhdev
Banaras Case 1915-1916 Sachindranath Sanyal
Kakori Case 1925 Ram Prasad Bismil and Ashfaqullah

Khan

REVOLUTIONARY ORGANISATION OUTSIDE INDIA
Year Association/ Founder Country

Organisation
1904 India House Shyamaji Krishna London (England)

Verma



1906 Abhinav Bharat V. D. Savarkar London (England)
1907 India Independence Taraknath Das America

Leauge
1913 Gadar Party Lala Hardayal San Fransisco

(America)
1914 India Independence — Berlin (Germany)

League
1915 India Independence Raja Mahendra Kabul

League and Pratap (Afghanistan)
Government

1942 India Independence Ras Bihari Bose Tokyo (Japan)
League.

1942 Indian National Army Ras Bihari Bose (In Tokyo (Japan)
(INA) 1943 reorganized by

Netaji in Singapore)
 

Slogans Leader
“Delhi Chalo” Subhash Chandra Bose
“Jai Hind” Subhash Chandra Bose
“Tum Mujhe Khun Do Subhash Chandra Bose
Mai Tumhe Azadi Dunga”  
“Bharat Chodo” Mahatma Gandhi
“Do ro Die” Mahatma Gandhi
“Aaram Haram Hai” Jawaharlal Nehru
“Inklab Zindabad” Bhagat Singh
“Back to the Vedas” Dayanand Saraswati
“Swaraj is my birth right and I Bal Gangadhar Tilak
shall have it”

NEWSPAPERS OF BRITISH INDIA



Newspapers Year Founder/Editor
Bengal Gazette (India's first 1780 James Augustus Hickey
newspaper)
Madras Courier 1784 —
Bombay Herald 1789 —
Samachar Darshan (Bangla) 1818 Kaire, Marshman
(oldest in Indian language)
Calcutta Journal — James Silk Buckingham
Sambad Kaumudi (Bangla) 1821 Raja Ram Mohan Roy
Bombay Samachar 1822 Fardoorejee Majban
(Gujarati)
Mirat-ul-Akhbar (Farsi) 1822 Raja Ram Mohan Roy
Udant Martand 1826 Jugul Kishore (first news paper of

Hindi)
Sambad Prabhakar 1830 Ishwar Chandra Gupta
Jam-e-Jamshed 1831 P.M. Motiwala
Bombay Times (English) 1838 Bennet Colloman & Co.
Hindu Patriot 1853 Harishchandra Mukherjee
Som Prakash 1858 Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar
Rast Goftar 1861 Dada Bhai Nauroji
Pioneer (English) 1865 Allahabad, now from Lucknow and

Delhi (Changed)
Amrit Bazar Patrika 1868 S.K. Ghosh, Motilal Ghosh,
(Bangla-Calcutta)  Tusarkanti Ghosh

Madras Mail 1868 First evening news paper
Statesman 1875 Robert Knight, Sunanda Dutta Roy
The Tribune (Chandigarh, 1877 Sir Dayal Singh Mazithia
Punjab)



Hindu (English-Madras) 1878 Vir Raghvachari, G.S. Iyer. N Subba
Rao Pantulu.

Paridashak 1880 Bipin Chandra Pal, Aurobindo Ghosh
Kesari (Marathi) 1881 Bal Gangadhar Tilak
Maratha (English) 1881 Bal Gangadhar Tilak
Sudharak (Marathi) 1888 Gopal Ganesh Agarkar
Bande Matram 1906 Bipin Chandra Pal, Arvind Ghosh
Al-Hilal 1912 Maulana Abul Kalam Azad
Bombay Chronicle 1913 Feroz Shah Mehta
Madras Standard 1914 Annie Besant

TITLES GIVEN TO THE NATIONAL FREEDOM FIGHTER
Mahatma M.K. Gandhi Rabindranath Tagore

Father of the Nation M.K. Gandhi Subhash Chandra Bose
Lokahitwadi Gopal Hari Deshmukh People
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel Women of Bardoli
Raja Ram Mohan Roy Akbar II
Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose —
Deshnayak Subhash Chandra Bose Ravindranath Tagore
Vivekanand Swami Vivekanand Maharaja Khetadi
 



###POLITY AND CONSTITUTION###
EVOLUTION OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
● A constitution is a document of people’s faith and aspirations possessing a
special legal sanctity. It is the fundamental law of the country and all other
laws and customs of the country in order to be valid must
conform to it.
THE REGULATING ACT, 1773
●  This act provided for the centralisation of administration of company’s
territories in India.
● Governor of Bengal became Governor- General of Bengal.
● Supreme Court to be set up at Calcutta (1774).
THE PITT’S INDIA ACT, 1784
●  Subordinated the Bombay and Madras Presidency to the Bengal
Presidency in all questions of war, diplomacy and revenues.
●  Strength of Governor-General in council reduced to 3. It distinguished
between the commercial and political functions of the company. It
established a system of double government.
● British Government was given the supreme control over company’s affair
and its administration in India.
THE CHARTER ACT, 1793
● This Act gave the power to the Governor-General to override his council.
THE CHARTER ACT, 1813
● The Act provided rules and procedures for the use of Indian revenue.
THE CHARTER ACT, 1833
● Governor-General of Bengal to be Governor-General of India.
● William Bentick was the first Governor-General of India.
● Government of Madras and Bombay deprived of legislative powers.
● Law member added to the council of Governor-General.
THE CHARTER ACT, 1853
●  The Act for the first time created a separate legislative machinery
consisting of 12 members legislative council which came to be known as the



Indian (central) legislative council. It introduced an open competition system
of selection and recruitment of civil servants.
●  Law member was made a full member of the Executive Council of the
Governor-General.

THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA ACT, 1858 It created a new office of
Secretary of state for India.
● The Secretary of state was assisted by a 15-member council.
● Governor-General was to be called as the Viceroy.
● A highly centralised administrative structure created. It ended the system of
double government by abolishing the Board of Control and Court of
Directors.
● The act known as the Act for the Good Government of India, abolished the
East India Company, and transferred the powers of government, territories
and revenues to the British Crown.
THE INDIAN COUNCIL ACT, 1861
● Government started associating Indians in legislation.
● A fifth member added to the Viceroy’s executive council.
● For legislative purposes, executive council of Viceroy was enlarged by 6 to
12 members.
THE INDIAN COUNCIL ACT, 1892
●  Introduction of indirect elections for the non-official members of the
Imperial and Provincial Legislative Councils.
●  The councils at both levels were to have the power of discussing the
Budget but not of voting.
THE MORLEY-MINTO REFORMS (THE INDIAN COUNCIL ACT,
1909)
● Provision of indirect elections to the legislative councils introduced.
● Additional members in Central Legislative increased to 60.
●  The membership of the Legislative Councils of the different provinces
enlarged.
● The members were given the right of discussion and asking supplementary
questions. It introduced a system of communal representation for muslims by
accepting concept of “Separate electorate”. Thus Lord Minto came to be
known as the “Father of Communal Electorate”.



THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA ACT, 1919 (MONTAGUE-
CHELMSFORD REFORMS)
● Dyarchy system introduced in the provinces.
●  The Provincial subjects of administration were to be divided into
‘Transferred’ and ‘Reserved’ Subjects.
● Indian legislature became ‘bicameral’.
●  Communal representation extended to Sikhs, Indian Christians, Anglo-
Indians and Europeans. It provided for the establishment of a Public Service
Commission. It separated, for the first time provincial budgets from the
Central budget.
THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA ACT, 1935
● Dyarchy introduced at the centre.
● Provincial dyarchy replaced by provincial autonomy in provinces.
● Provision for the establishment of an All India Federation consisting of the
British Provinces and Princely States as units.
● Establishment of a Federal Court.
● Three fold division of powers–Federal, Provincial and Concurrent Lists. It
provided for the establishment of a Reserve Bank of India to control the
currency and credit of the country.
INDIAN INDEPENDENCE ACT, 1947
●  The British P.M. was Clement Atlee and then Viceroy of India Lord
Mountbatten, who had put forth the partition plan. Also became the first
Governor General of free India.
● The executive council provided by the 1919 act continued to advice the
Governor General till1947. It abolished the office of Viceroy. Also it
abolished the office of secretary of state for India. It assigned dual functions
to the constituent assembly and declared
this dominion legislature as a sovereign body.
INTERIM GOVERNMENT (3 SEPTEMBER, 1946)

Sl. Members Party Portfolios Held
No.

1. Jawaharlal Nehru INC External Affairs and
Commonwealth Relations.

2. Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel INC Home, Information & Broad



casting
3. Dr. Rajendra Prasad INC Food and Agriculture
4. Dr. John Mathai INC Industries and Supplies
5. Sardar Baldev Singh INC Defenc
6. Asaf Ali INC Railways and Transport
7. Jagjivan Ram INC Laboure
8. C.H. Bhabha INC Works, Mines and Power
9. C. Rajagopalachari INC Education and Arts

FIRST CABINET OF FREE INDIA (1947) :
Sl. Members Portfolios Held
No.

1. Jawaharlal Nehru Prime Minister, External Affairs and
Commonwealth Relations,
Scientific Research.

2. Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel Home, Information and
Broadcasting, States

3. Dr. Rajendra Prasad Food and Agriculture
4. Maulana Abul Kalam Azad Education
5. Dr. John Mathai Railways and Transport
6. R.K. Shanmugham Chetty Finance
7. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar Law
8. Jagjivan Ram Labour
9. Sardar Baldev Singh Defence
10. Rajkumari Amrit Kaur Health
11. C.H. Bhabha Commerce
12. Rafi Ahmed Kidwai Communication
13. Dr. Shyam Prasad Mukherji Industries and Supplies
14. V.N. Gadgil Works, Mines and Power.



IMPORTANT FACTS
● The Constitution of India was formally enacted on 26 November, 1949.
● The Constitution of India came into force on 26 January, 1950.
● There were 395 Articles and 8 Schedules in the Constitution when it was
finally passed.
● At present the Constitution consists of 444 Articles and 12 Schedules.
●  The constitution of India was framed and adopted by the Constituent
Assembly of India.
● As per the Cabinet Mission Plan of 1946, the Constituent Assembly was
set up in November 1946.
● The members were elected indirectly by the Provincial Assemblies in the
ratio of one member per one million population.
● There were a total of 389 members in the Constituent Assembly of which
296 were elected by the members of the Provincial Assemblies and the rest
were nominated by the Princely States.
● The first meeting of the Constituent Assembly was held on 9th December,
1946 with Sachidanand Sinha as the interim President.
● Later Dr. Rajendra Prasad was elected as the President of the Constituent
Assembly on 11th December, 1946.
●  The historic “Objective Resolution” was moved in the Constituent
Assembly by Pt. Jawahar Lal Nehru on 13th December, 1946 which
ultimately became the Preamble of our Constitution.
●  The Constituent Assembly formed 13 important committees for framing
the Constitution.
●  A drafting committee of 7 members was set up on 29th August, 1947
under the Chairmanship of Dr. B. R. Ambedkar.

Sl. Important Committees Chairman
No.

1. Union Powers Committee Jawaharlal Nehru
2. Union Constitution Committee Jawaharlal Nehru
3. Provincial Constitution Sardar Patel

Committee
4. Drafting Committee — Dr. B.R. Ambedkar (Head)

— N. Gopalaswamy Ayyangar
— Alladi Krishnaswamy Ayyar



— Dr. K.M. Munshi
— Syed M. Sadullah
— B.L. Mittar/N Madhava Rau
(Replaced)
— D.P. Khaitan/ T.T. Krishn-
amachari Replaced)

5. Advisory Committee on  
 Fundamental Rights, Minorities — Sardar Patel

and Tribal and Excluded Areas.
This committee had the
following sub-committees :

 (a) Fundamental Right Sub- — J.B. Kripalani
Committee

 (b) Minorities Sub-Committee — H.C. Mukherjee

 (c) Sub-Committee on — Gopinath Bardoloi North-East
issues

6. Rules of Procedure Committee — Dr. Rajendra Prasad
7. States Committee — Jawaharlal Nehru
8. Steering Committee — Dr. Rajendra Prasad
9. Ad-Hoc Committee on the — Dr. Rajendra Prasad

National Flag
10. Special Credential Committee — Alladi Krishnaswamy Iyer

to Examine the Draft
Constitution

 
● The Constituent Assembly worked in three phases.
(i) Ist Phase : As Constituent Assembly under the limitations of Cabinet
Mission Plan-6th December, 1946 to 14th August, 1947.
(ii) 2nd Phase : As Constituent Assembly, a sovereign body + Provisional
Parliament – 15th August, 1947 to 26th November, 1949
(iii) 3rd Phase : As a Provisional Parliament– 27th November, 1949 to
March, 1952.



● The Constituent Assembly took 2 years 11 months and 18 days to frame
the Constitution.
● The design of the National Flag was adopted by the Constituent Assembly
on July 22, 1947.
●  The National Anthem was adopted by the Constituent Assembly on
January 24, 1950.
●  The first meeting of the Constituent Assembly was boycotted by the
Muslim League.
●  Shri B. N. Rau was appointed as the legal Advisor of the Constituent
Assembly.
● The song ‘Jana-gana-Mana’ was adopted by the Constituent Assembly as
the National Anthem on 24th January] 1950.
PREAMBLE
“WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnly resolved to constitute
India into a SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST SECULAR DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC and to secure to all its citizens; JUSTICE, social, economic
and political; LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship;
EQUALITY of status and of opportunity and to promote among them all
FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity and
integrity of the Nation. IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY this
twenty-sixth day of November 1949, do HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT AND
GIVE TO OURSELVES THIS CONSTITUTION.
● Idea of Preamble borrowed from Constitution of USA.
● The objectives specified in the Preamble contain the basic structure of our
Constitution. It is non-justiciable, that is, its provisions are not enforceable in
courts of law.
● The basic structure cannot be amended. It is a preface or introduction to the
Constitution.
● The Supreme Court expressed the view that the “Preamble is the key to its
makers” mind.
● Justice Madhokar said in ‘Sajjan Singh Vs. Rajasthan State’ case that the
preamble is the sum and substance of the Constitution.
●  In the ‘Golaknath Vs. Punjab State’ case, Justice Hidaytullah remarked
that the preamble is the synopsis of those principles on which the
government has to work upon.



● The objective of the constitution is to secure Justice, Liberty, Equality and
Fraternity for every citizen.
● The world ‘Socialist,’ ‘Secular’ and the ‘Unity and Integrity’ of the nation
were added by the 42nd Amendment Act of 1976.
SOME WORDS IN PREAMBLE
● Sovereign : The word sovereign means that the state has power to legislate
on any subject in confirmity with constitutional limitations.
● Socialist : Socialist aims to end poverty, ignorance, disease and inequality
of opportunity.
This socialist concept ought to be implemented in the true spirit of the
constitution.
● Secularism : The constitution of India stands for a secular state. The state
has no official religion secularism pervades its Provisions which give full
opportunity to all persons to profess, practice and propagate religion of their
choice.
● Republic : Republic means no room for hereditary ruler.
●  The head of the state is always elected directly or indirectly for a fixed
period, e.g. USA.
●  The term ‘republic’ in our preamble indicates that India has an elected
head called the president.
SOURCE OF THE CONSTITUTION
● Government of India Act, 1935 : Federal Scheme, office of the Governor,
power of Federal Judiciary, Public Service Commission, Emergency
provisions.
●  USA Constitution :Fundamental Rights, written constitution, Supreme
Court, Independence of Judiciary and Judicial Reviews, President as the
Executive Head. The Vice-President, Impeachment of the President,
Removal of Supreme Court and High Court Judges, Preamble.
●  British Constitution : Parliamentary system, Rule of law, legislative
procedure, Prime Minister, Cabinet System, Single Citizenship, Prerogative
writs, Bicameral Parliament, Nominal head-President, provision of speaker
in the Lok Sabha.
●  Australian Constitution : The concurrent list, centrestate Relationship,
Freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse, Joint sitting of the two Houses
of the Parliament, Language of the preamble.



● Soviet (USSR) Constitution : Fundamental Duties and ideal of justice,
Five year Plan.
●  German/Weimar Constitution : Emergency provisions and their effect
on the Fundamental Rights.
● Japan Constitution : Procedure established by the law.
● Canadian Constitution : Appointment of state Governor by the centre,
Advisory jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, Federation with a strong centre,
vesting of residuary powers in the centre.
●  South African Constitution : Procedure of Amendment of the
constitution, Election of the Members of Rajya Sabha.
● Irish Constitution : Directive principles of state policy, Nominations of
Members of Rajya sabha, method of Election of President.
THE UNION AND ITS TERRITORY
● According to Article1- India, that is Bharat, shall be a union of states.
● The territory of India shall comprise —
(i) The territories of the states;
(ii) The union territories specified in the First schedule and
(iii) Such other territories as may be acquired.
● Parliament may by law —
(i) form a new state by separation of territory from any state or by uniting
two or more states or parts of states or by uniting any territory to a part of
any state
(ii) increase the area of any state;
(iii) diminish the area of any state;
(iv) alter the boundaries of any state;
(v) alter the name of any state.
New States and Union Territories Created After 1956 :
Sl. No. New State Establishment

1. Gujarat, Maharashtra 1960
2. Dadara and Nagar Haveli 1961
3. Daman and Diu 1987
4. Puducherry 1963
5. Nagaland 1963
6. Haryana/UT-Chandigarh 1966



7. Himachal Pradesh 1971
8. Manipur, Tripura, Meghalaya 1972
9. Sikkim 1975
10. Mizoram, Arunachal Pradesh and 1987

Goa
11. Chattisgarh, Uttarakhand and 2000

Jharkhand
12. Telangana 2014
 
CITIZENSHIP
● Every person who has domicile in the territory of India and
(i) who was born in the territory of India; or
(ii) either of whose parents was born in the territory of India, or
(iii) who has been ordinarily resident in the territory of India for not less than
five shall be a citizen of India.
● Under the Indian constitution there is only one domicile.
● There is no separate domicile for the state.
●  Persons who migrated to Pakistan after March 1, 1947 but returned to
India under a permit for resettlement.
● Any person who or either of whose parents or any of whose grand parents
was born in India.
● Person who migrated to India from Pakistan before 19th July, 1948 and
since then have been ordinarily residing in India.
● Person who migrated to India from Pakistan on or after 19th July, 1948 but
got themselves, duly registered as citizens with a competent officer appointed
for that purpose.
● When an Indian citizen voluntarily (consciously, knowingly and without
duress, undue influence or compulsion) acquires the citizenship of another
country, his Indian citizenship automatically terminates.
●  The parliament has enacted the citizenship Act, 1955 which has been
amended in 1986, 1992, 2003 and 2005.
●  The Act provides for the acquisition of Indian citizenship after the
commencement of the constitution in five ways, i.e., Birth, Descent,
Registration, Nationalisation and Incorporation of territory.



LOSS OF INDIAN CITIZENSHIP UNDER THE ACT :
●  The citizenship Act, 1955 also laydown the three modes by which an
Indian citizen whether a citizen at the commencement of the constitution or
subsequent to it , may lose his citizenship—
(i) Renunciation (ii) Termination (iii) Deprivation
● Citizenship Amendment Act, 1992 : According to this Act, the child who
is born outside India and if his mother belongs to India can have the Indian
citizenship.
● Before this act, any child born outside India could acquire citizenship only
if his father was a citizen of India.
FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS
●  The fundamental Rights are meant for promoting the ideal of political
democracy.
● These are fundamental in the sense, that they are the most essential rights
for the allround development (material, intellectual, moral and spiritual) of
the individuals. It is also named so because they are guaranteed and protected
by the fundamental law of the land i.e. constitution.
● Articles 12 to 35 deal with the fundamental rights.
● There are six fundamental rights excluding right to basic education.
● The fundamental rights are the freedoms guaranteed but these freedoms are
not absolute, but are justiciable.
Justiciable means judicially enforceable.
● The fundamental rights are different from the legal rights.
● The legal rights are protected and enforced by ordinary law.
On the contrary the fundamental right is protected and guaranteed by the
constitution.
● Article 21A is the right to education, was inserted in the year 2002 by the
86th constitutional amendment Act.
● Generally right to education is falls under the right to freedom.
● Except the rights mentioned in articles 20 and 21, President has the power
to suspend the enforcement of fundamental rights.
● The fundamental rights are of two categories —
(i) Rights which are provided to the citizens of India
(ii) for all other person including foreigners.
●  The rights granted under Articles 15, 16,19, 29 and 30 are available to
citizens only while all other rights are available to all persons.



● When there is a Proclamation of emergency under Article 352 on grounds
of war or external aggression, the operation of Article 19 remains suspended.
● The President can suspend operation of other rights (excluding art 20 and
21) also by a separate order (issued under Article 359) during the Prevalence
of national emergency.
●  Initially there were seven fundamental rights in our consitution but the
44th amendment Act 1978 deleted right to property.
● There are six categories of Fundamental Rights :
1. Right to Equality
2. Right to Freedom
3. Right against Exploitation
4. Right to Freedom of Religion
5. Cultural and Educational Rights
6. Right to Constitutional Remedies.
1. Right to Equality (Articles 14-18)
(i) Article 14 : Provides for equality before law or equal protection of law to
all persons within the territory of India.
(ii) Article 15 : Prohibits 'the state' from discriminating against any citizen
on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, or place of birth.
(iii) Article 16 : Provides for equality of opportunity to all citizens in matters
of public employment.
(iv) Article 17 : Provides for abolition of untouchability.
(v) Article 18 : Provides for abolition of titles.
2. Right to Freedom (Articles 19-22)
(i) Article 19 : It guarantees the citizens of India the following six
fundamental freedoms —
(a) Freedom of speech and expression
(b) Freedom of Assembly
(c) Freedom of Association
(d) Freedom of movements
(e) Freedom of residence and settlement
(f) Freedom of profession, occupation, trade or business.
(ii) Article 20 : Protection in respect of conviction for offences
(iii) Article 21 : Protection of life and personal liberty.
(iv) Article 22 : Protection against arrest and detention in certain cases.
● Whenever a person is arrested, he should be informed as soon as may be,
of the grounds for his arrest and should be allowed to consult and to be



defended by a legal practitioner of his choice and produced before the nearest
magistrate within a period of 24 hours of such an arrest.
3. Right against Exploitation (Article 23-24)
(i) Article 23 : Prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour.
(ii) Article 24 : No child below the age of 14 can be employed.
4. Right to freedom of Religion (Article 25-28)
(i) Article 25 : Freedom of conscience and the right to freely profess,
practice and propagate religion.
(ii) Article 26 : Freedom to manage religious affairs.
(iii) Article 27 : Prohibits taxes on religious grounds.
(iv) Article 28 : Freedom as to attendance at religious ceremonies in certain
educational institutions.
5. Cultural and Educational Rights (29-30)
(i) Article 29 : Protection of interests of minorities.
(ii) Article 30 : Right of minorities to establish and administer educational
institutions.
(iii) Article 31 : Omitted by the 44th Amendment Act 1978.
6. Right to constitutional Remedies.
Article 32 : The right to move to the supreme court in case of violation of
fundamental rights. It has been called the cornerstone of the entire edifice
setup by the constitution.
WRITS –TYPES AND SCOPE
The supreme court under Art 32 and the High courts under Art 226 can issue
the writs of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, certiorari and quo-
warranto.
Habeas corpus : It is a latin term which literally means “to have the body of
”. It is an order issued by the court to a person who has detained another
person, to produce the body of the latter before it. The court then examines
the cause and legality of detention. It would set the detained person free, if
the detention is found to be illegal. Thus, this writ is a bulwark of individual
liberty against arbitrary detention. The writ of habeas corpus can be issued
against both public authorities as well as private individuals.
Mandamus : It literally means ‘we command’. It is a command issued by
the court to a public official asking him to perform his official duties that he
has failed or refused to perform. It can also be issued against any public



body, a corporation, an inferior court, a tribunal or government for the same
purpose.
The writ of mandamus cannot be issued
(a) against a private individual or body
(b) to enforce departmental instruction that does not possess statutory force.
(c) when duty is discretionary and not mandatory
(d) to enforce a contractual obligation.
Prohibition : Literally, it means ‘to forbid’. It is issued by a higher court to a
lower court or tribunal to prevent the latter from exceeding its jurisdiction or
usurping a jurisdiction that it does not possess. Thus unlike mandamus that
directs activity, the prohibition directs inactivity.
Certiorari : In the literal sense, it means ‘to be certified’ or ‘to be informed’.
It is issued by a higher court to a lower court or tribunal either to transfer a
case pending with the latter to itself or to squash the order of the latter in a
case.
It is issued on the grounds of excess of jurisdiction or lack of jurisdiction or
error of law.
Thus, unlike prohibition, which is only preventive, certiorari is both
preventive as well as curative.
QUO-Warranto : In the literal sense, it means ‘by what authority or
warrant’. It is issued by the court to enquire into the legality of claim of a
person to a public office. Hence, it prevents illegal usurpation of public office
by a person. The writ can be issued only in case of a substantial public office
of a permanent character created by a statue or by the constitution. It cannot
be issued in cases of ministerial office or private office. It can be sought by
any interested person and not necessarily by the aggrieved person.
FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES
● The Fundamental Duties are contained in Article 51 A of Part IV A of the
Constitution.
● The Fundamental Duties were inserted into the Constitution of India by the
42nd Amendment Act, 1976.
●  These Duties were added on the recommendation of Swaran Singh
committee.
●  The Fundamental Duties in the Indian Constitution are inspired by the
constitution of Russia (former USSR).
● The basis for Fundamental Duties is the Japanese Model.



ELEVEN FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES
1. To abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the
National Flag and the National Anthem.
2. To cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle
for freedom.
3. To uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India.
4. To defend the country and render national service when called upon to do
so.
5. To promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all
the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional
diversities and to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women.
6. To value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite cultures.
7. To protect and improve natural environment including forest, lake rivers
and wildlife and to have compassion for living creature.
8. To develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and
reform.
9. To safeguard public property and to abjure violence.
10. To strive for excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity.
11. To provide opportunities for education to his child or, as the case may be,
ward between the age of six and fourteen years.
DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY
● These provisions are given in Part IV of Indian Constitution.
●  Directive Principles of state policy are in the form of instructions to the
governments at the centre as well as states.
●  Though these principles are non justiciable, they are fundamental in the
governance of the country.
● The idea of the Directive Principles of State Policy has been taken from the
Irish Republic.
●  The constitution covers from Article 36 to 51 as Directive Principles of
State Policy.
●  They are unique blend of socialistic, liberal, democratic and Gandhian
Principles.
● They describe as the ‘conscience of the constitution’.
● In the “State of Tamil Nadu etc. Vs L.Abu Kavur Bai” case in 1984, the
Supreme court held that although directive principles of State Policy are not
enforceable, yet the court should not avoid them.



Classification of DPSPs :
1. Socialist Principles
2. Gandhian principles
3. Liberal Principles
Socialist Principles :
These principles reflect the ideology of socialism. They lay down the
framework of a democratic socialist state, aim at providing social and
economic justice and set the path towards welfare state. The articles which
contains socialist principles are :
●  Article 38 : To promote the welfare of the people by securing a social
order permeated by justice- social, economic and political and to minimise
inequalities.
in income, status, facilities and opportunities.
● Article 39 : To secure
(a) the right to adequate means of livelihood for all citizens.
(b) the equitable distribution of meterial resources of the community for the
common good;
(c) prevention of concentration of wealth and means of production.
(d) equal pay for equal work for men and women.
(e) preservation of the health and strength of workers and children against
forcible abuse, and
(f) opportunities for healthy development of children.
● Article 39(A) : To promote equal justice and to provide free legal aid to
the poor.
●  Article 41 : To secure the right to work, to education and to public
assistance in cases of unemployment, old age, sickness and disablement.
● Article 42 : To make provision for just and humane conditions for work
and maternity relief.
● Article 43 : To secure a living wage, a decent standard of life and social
and cultural opportunities for all workers.
● Article 47 : To raise the level of nutrition and the standard of living of
people and to improve public health.
Gandhian Principles :
These principles are based on Gandhian ideology. They represent the
programme of reconstruction enunciated by Gandhi during the national
movement.



●  Article 40 : To organise village panchayats and endow them with
necessary powers and authority to enable them to function as units of
selfgovernment.
● Article 43 : To promote cottage industries on an individual or cooperation
basis in rural areas.
● Article 46 : To promote the educational and economic interests of SC &
ST and other weaker sections of the society and to protect them from social
injustice and exploitation.
● Article 47 : To prohibit the consumption of intoxicating drinks and drugs
which are injurious to health.
● Article 48 : To prohibit the slaughter of cows, calves and other milch and
draught cattle and to improve their breeds.
Liberal Principles :
These principles represent the ideology of liberalism. These are—
● Article 44 : The state will try to secure for the citizens a uniform civil code
throughout the territory of India.
● Article 45 : The state shall endeavour to provide early childhood care and
education for all children until they complete the age of six years.
● Article 48 : To organise agriculture and animal husbandry on modern and
scientific lines.
● Article 48 A : To protect and improve the environment and to sateguard
forests and wildlife.
● Article 49 : To protect monuments, places and objects of artistic or historic
interest which are declared to be of national importance.
● Article 51 : To promote international peace and security.
— Maintain just and honourable relations between nations.
— To foster respect for international law and treaty obligations — To
encourage settlement of international disputes by arbitration.
DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES ADDED BY 42nd AMENDMENT ACT,
1976
The 42nd Amendment Act of 1976 added four new Directive principles to
the original list.
● Article 39 : To secure opportunities for healthy development of children.
● Article 39A : To promote equal justice and to provide free legal aid to the
poor.



● Article 43A : To take steps to secure the participation of workers in the
management of industries.
● Article 48A : To protect and improve the environment and to safeguard
forests and wildlife.
DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLE ADDED BY 44th AMENDMENT ACT, 1978
● Article 38 : The state to minimise inequalities in income, status, facilities
and opportunities.
DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLE ADDED BY 86th AMENDMENT ACT, 2002
It changed the subject matter of Art 45 and made elementary education a
fundamental right under Art 21A. The amended directive required the state
to provide early childhood care and education for all children until they
complete the age of six years.
DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES ADDED BY 97th AMENDMENT ACT,
2011
●  Article 43 B : It requires the state to promote voluntary formation,
autonomous functioning, democratic control and professional management
of co-operative societies.
Difference Between DPSPs and Fundamental Rights
1. They are not Justiciable by 1.Fundamental Rights the court
2. They are positive in nature. 2.They are negative in nature.
3. They are for state use 3.Used by the citizen.
4. They establish economic and 4.They establish political democracy.
social democracy
5. They have only moral power. 5.They have legal power.
UNION EXECUTIVE
THE PRESIDENT
● There shall be a President of India (Article 52).
● The executive power of the union shall be vested in the President and shall
be exercised by him either directly or through officers subordinate to him in
accordance with this constitution (Article 53).
● Part V, Articles from 52 to 73, deals with the President and Vice President.
● The President is the first citizen of India.
QUALIFICATION



● Must be a citizen of India.
● Completed 35 years of age.
● Qualified for election as a member of the house of the people (Lok Sabha).
● Must not hold any office of profit under the government of India or the
government of any state or any local authority or any other public authority.
Conditions of President's Office
● Shall not be a member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the
Legislature of any State.
● The President shall not hold any other office of profit.
● The President shall be entitled without payment of rent to the use of his
official residance.
Election of President :
●  The President shall be elected by the members of an electoral college
consisting of —
(i) the elected members of both House of Parliament, and
(ii) the elected members of the Legislative Assemblies of the States
Note : State includes the National Capital Territory of Delhi and the Union
Territory of Puducherry.
●  The total voting strength of the Parliament is equal to the total voting
strength of all state assemblies together.
●  The president’s election is held in accordance with the system of
proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote and the
voting is by secret ballot.
● The value of vote of each member of Legislative Assembly of a State is
determined by the formule as given below :
[Total population of the state/Number of elected members of state legislative
Assembly]*1000
●  Every elected member of either House of Parliament shall have such
number of votes as may be obtained by.
Value of the vote of an MP = Total value of votes of all MLAs of all
states/Total number of elected members of parliament
● Supreme Court inquires all dispute regarding President's election.
Term of office of President
● The President shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on
which he enters upon his office.
(i) the president may, by writing under his hand addressed to the Vice-
President, resign his office;



(ii) The President may, for violation of the constitution be removed from
office by impeachment in the manner provided in article 61;
Procedure for Impeachment
● Nature of impeachment is Quasi- Judicial.
● Can be impeached only on the ground of violation of constitution.
● The charge shall be preferred by either House of Parliament.
● The proposal to prefer such charge is contained in a resolution which has
been moved after at least 14 day's notice in writing signed by not less than
1/4th of the total number of members of the House has been passed by a
majority of not less than two thirds of the total membership of the house.
● When a charge has been so preferred by either House of Parliament, the
other House shall investigate the charge or cause the charge to be
investigated and the President shall have the right to appear and to be
represented at such investigation.
● If a result of the investigation a resolution is passed by a majority of not
less than 2/3rd of the total membership of the House by which the charge
was investigated, declaring that the charged preferred against the President
from his office as form the date on which the resolution is so passed.
Vacancy
● Office of the President falls vacant due to the following reasons—
(i) Completing 5 years terms;
(ii) Due to resignation;
(iii) Due to impeachment;
(iv) Due to death;
(v) Due to illegal election.
POWERS OF THE PRESIDENT
1. Executive Power :
●  All executive action of the union must be taken in the name of the
President. (Article 77)
● He appoints the followings :
1. Prime Minister
2. Ministers
3. Chief Justice and Judges of Supreme Court and High Courts, 4. Chairman
and Members of UPSC.
5. Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG)
6. Attorney General of India (AGI)



7. Chief Election commissioner and other members of election commission.
8. Governors
9. Members of finance commission
10. Ambassadors
●  He directly administers the union Territories through the Lt. Governor,
Commissioner or Administrator.
● He can appoint a commission to investigate into the conditions of SCs, STs
and OBCs.
● He can appoint an inter-state council to promote centre-state relation and
for cooperation amongst different states.
2. Legislative Powers :
● He can summon and prorogue the session of the two houses.
● He can dissolve Lok Sabha (Article 85).
● He can address both the houses jointly or separately.
●  He addresses the first session after general elections and at the
commencement of the first session of each year.
●  Nominate 12 member to Rajya Sabha and 2 members of Anglo- Indian
community in Lok Sabha if they have not receive adequate representation.
● Certain bills can be introduced in Parliament only on the recommendation
of the President.
● Presidential assent is essential before a bill becomes an Act.
●  He can enact laws through ordinance when the Parliament is in recess.
These ordinance must be passed by Parliament with the 6 weeks of
reassembly.
●  Lays the report of the comptroller and Auditor General, the finance
commission and others before the Parliment.
●  When a bill is sent to the President after it has been passed by the
Parliament, he can :
(i) give his assent to the bill or
(ii) withhold his assent to the bill or
(iii) Return the bill (if it is not a money bill or constitutional amendment bill)
for reconsideration of the Parliament, although only once.
●  Decides on the questions as to the qualifications of the MPs, in
consultation with the Election Commission.
3. Financial Powers :
● All money bills can originate in Parliament only on recommendation of
President.



● No demand for a grant can be made except on his recommendation.
●  He appoints Finance commission after each 5years that recommends
distribution of taxes between union and states.
●  The President shall in respect of every financial year cause to be laid
before both the Houses of parliament a statement of the estimated receipts
and expenditure of the Government of India for that year.
4. Judicial Powers :
● The President shall have the power to grant pardons reprieves, respites or
remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of
any person convicted of any offence.
●  The President is the only authority for pardoning a sentence of death
(Article 72)
6. Military Powers :
● He is the supreme commander of the defence forces of India.
● He appoints chief of Army, Navy and Air Force.
●  Declare war and concludes peace, subject to the approval of the
Parliament.
7. Emergency Powers :
1. National emergency (Art 352)
2. President’s rule (Art 356 & 365)
3. Financial emergencies (Art 360)
VICE-PRESIDENT
● According to the Article 63, there shall be a Vice-President.
● Vice-President is ranked 2nd after President.
● He is the ex-officio chairman of Rajya Sabha.
● He is not a member of Rajya Sabha hence he has no right to vote. But he
can exercise a vote in the case of tie or equality of votes.
●  He entitled the salary and allowances payable to the chairman of Rajya
Sabha not for the post of Vice President.
Election of Vice-President
● Vice-President is elected by the members of an electoral college consisting
of the members of both House of Parliament.
● Election is held in accordance with system of proportional representation
by means of the single transferable vote and voting is by secret ballot.
●  Thus this electoral college is different from the electoral college for the
election of the President in the following two respects :



1. It consists of both elected and nominated members of the Parliament (in
the case of president, only elected members).
2. It does not include the members of the state legislative assemblies (in the
case of President, the elected members of the state legislative assemblies are
included).
Eligibility
● He should be a citizen of India.
● He has completed 35 years of age.
● He should qualified for election as a member of council of states.
● A person holding any office of profit under the government shall not be
eligible for election as the Vice-President.
● The election to the vacancy of the office of the Vice-President is completed
before the expiry of his term.
● There is no mandatory provision, like in case of the President, to hold the
election within the six months.
● All the doubts and disputes arising out of or in connection with the election
of the Vice- President shall be decided by the Supreme Court.
● When the President is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence,
illness or any other case, the Vice President shall discharge his functions until
the date on which the President resumes his duties.
ATTORNEY GENERAL OF INDIA
● Article 76 States that the President shall appoint a person who is qualified
to be appointed as a judge of the Supreme Court to be the Attorney General
of India.
● He is the first legal officer of the Government of India.
● He holds office during the pleasure of the President.
● He gives legal advice to the Government of India.
● He is not a member of the either House of the Parliament.
● He has the right to attend and speak in the Parliamentary deleberations and
meetings of both the Houses.
● He has no right to vote in Parliament.
●  He is assisted by two solicitiors- General and four additional solicitors-
General.
COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL (C.A.G.)
● The constitution of India provides for the office of CAG under Articles
148-151.



● He is appointed by the president having long administrative experiance and
knowledge of accounts.
●  He holds office for a full term of 6 years or upto 65 years of his age
whichever is earlier.
● He can resign from the office by addressing the resignation letter to the
President.
●  The President can remove the CAG on the same ground and the same
manner as the judge of Supreme Court.
●  The President can remove him on the basis of resolution passed to that
effect by both the Houses of Parliament with a special majority.
● He is the guardian of the Public Purse.
● He is an officer of the Parliament and he is called ‘Ears and Eyes’ of the
Public Accounts Committee.
●  CAG audits all the transacitons related to the Consolidated Fund,
Contigency Fund and Public Account Fund of Union and State
Governments.
THE PARLIAMENT
● Parliament is the supreme legislative body of India.
● Article 79 to 122, Part V deals with the Parliament.
● According to Article 79, the Parliament consists of
1. The President
2. House of the people (Lok Sabha)
3. Council of states (Rajya Sabha)
● Though the President is not a member of either House of Parliament. He is
an integral part of it.
House of the People (Lok Sabha)
● In the constitution, the strength of the Lok Sabha was provisioned to be not
more than 552.
From the state = 530 From the UTs = 20 From the Anglo Indian = 2 Total
seats = 552
● But at present there are 545 seats (530 + 13 + 2).
●  The 84th amendment Act 2001, extended freeze on Lok Sabha and
assembly seats till 2026 by the Vajpayee government.
Tenure of the Lok Sabha
● The normal tenure of the Lok Sabha is 5 years. It may be dissolved earlier
by the President.



● The life of the Lok Sabha can be extended by the Parliament beyond the
five year term during the period of National Emergency Proclaimed under
Art 352.
● But this extension is not more than one year at a time.
●  However, such extension shall remain in force for not more than six
months after the emergency has been revoked.
Qualification for the membership of Lok Sabha :
● Be a citizen of India.
● Be not less than 25 years of age.
● Be a registered voter in any of the Parliamentary constituancy in India.
● Must not hold any office of profit.
Disqualification of the MPs :
● If he holds any office of profit.
● If a competent court declares him to be of unsound mind.
● If he is an undischarged insolvent.
● If his citizenship is found forged.
● If he voluntarily acquires the citizenship of any foreign country.
● If he is so disqualified under any law by the Parliament.
● If he is so disqualified under the tenth schedule.
Seat of MP becames vacant under these situations :
●  If he resigns from the House by writing a letter to the speaker or the
chairman.
● Absent for 60 days without permission
● Expelled from the house under disciplinary action.
● If he over rules the ‘Whip’.
● Elected to the office of President or vice President or Governor of the state.
Powers of the Lok Sabha :
● The money bills and the financial bill can be introduced only in the Lok
sabha and not in the Rajya Sabha.
●  In case of money bill, the Rajya Sabha has only the right to make
recommendations and the Lok Sabha may or may not accept this.
●  A money bill must be passed by the Rajya Sabha within a period of 2
weeks or 14 days otherwise the bill shall be deemed to be passed
automatically by the house.
●  Thus the Lok Sabha enjoys exclusive legislative jurisdiction over the
passage of the money bills.
● The council of ministers are responsible to the Lok Sabha.



● Confidence and no confidence motions are introduced in the Lok Sabha
only.
● Under Article 352, the Lok Sabha in a special sitting can disapprove the
continuance of the National Emergency Proclaimed by the President.
● The leader of the Lok Sabha is the Prime Minister.
Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Lok Sabha :
● The speaker is the Chief Presiding officer of the Lok Sabha.
● The two officers are elected from amongst the members of Lok Sabha after
a new Lok Sabha is constituted.
● In absence of speaker, deputy speaker performs the duties of speaker.
● The speaker continues in the office even after the dissolution of the Lok
Sabha till a newly elected Lok Sabha meets.
● Usually the speaker, after his election resign from his party membership
and acts in an impartial manner.
● He does not vote in first instance.
● He exercises his casting vote only to remove a deadlock.
● Speaker can vacate his office earlier, if he resigns by writing to the Deputy
speaker. Similary Deputy speaker can resign office by writing to the speaker.
● The speaker presides over the meetings of the house and his rulings on the
proceedings of the house are final.
Powers of the Speaker :
● Whether a bill is a money bill or not, is certified only by the speaker and
his decision is final and binding.
● He is the ex-officio chairman of India’s Parliamentary group.
● He presides over conference of presiding officers.
●  He himself chairs Business Advisory Committee, General Purpose
Committee and the Rules Committee.
●  The committee of the Parliament function essentially under the speaker
and their chairpersons are also appointed or nominated by him.
● His decisions are final in all matters of the House.
● Maintain order and decorum in the house for the smooth functioning.
● He can call for the secret sitting of the house on the request of the leader of
the house.
● He presides over a joint sitting of the two Houses of Parliament.
●  He decides the question of disqualification of members of Lok Sabha,
arising on the ground of defection under the provisions of the Tenth
schedule.



The Rajya Sabha or the Council of States :
● The Rajya Sabha is to consist of not more than 250 members (238 +12).
● The members to be nominated by the President are persons having special
knowledge or practical experience in respect of literature, science, art and
social service.
● Rajya Sabha is a permanent body and is not subject to dissolution.
● One-third of the members retire every two years and are replaced by newly
elected members.
● Each member is elected for a term of 6 years.
Qualification
● The person must be a citizen of India.
● The must not be below the age of 30 years.
● He should not hold any office of profit.
Powers of Rajya Sabha
● The powers of Rajya Sabha are in Articles 67, 249 and 312.
●  According to Article 67 a resolution seeking the removal of the Vice-
President can originate only in the Rajya Sabha. After passing the resolution
by Rajya Sabha, it goes for approval of the Lok Sabha, but no resolution for
the purpose of this clause shall be moved unless at least 14 days notice has
been given of the intention to move the resolution.
● If Rajya Sabha has declared by resolution supported by not less than two-
thirds of the members present and voting that it is necessary or expedient in
the national interest so to do Parliament may by law provide for the creation
of one or more all India services (including an all India Judicial Service)
common to the union and the states and subject to the other provisions of the
chapter regulate the recruitment and the conditions of service of persons
appointed to any such service.
● A resolution seeking legislation on any subject of the state list can only
originate in the Rajya Sabha, if it thinks that such resolution is necessary or
expedient in the national interest (art-249).
Officer’s of the Rajya Sabha :
1.Chairman
● The vice President of India is the ex-officio chairman of the Rajya Sabha.
●  Unlike the speaker the chairman is not a member of House i.e. Rajya
Sabha.
● He Presides over the Proceedings of the Rajya Sabha as long as he does
not act as the President of India during a vacancy in the office of the



President.
● He can be removed from the office only if he is removed from the office of
the Vice-President.
● He may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Rajya Sabha
passed by a absolute majority of all the then members of the council, which
is to be approved by the Lok Sabha by a simple majority. Such a resolution
can only be moved by giving at least 14 day's prior notice to the chairman.
Deputy Chairman
● He is elected by the Rajya Sabha from amongst its members.
●  In the absence of the chairman, Deputy chairman Presides over the
functions and proceedings of the house.
● He shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the Rajya Sabha .
● He may resign his office by writing to the chairman
●  He may also be removed from the office by a resolution of the Rajya
Sabha .
THE BUDGET
● The budget is contained in Articles 112 to 117.
● According to Article 112 the President shall in respect of every financial
year cause to be laid before both the House of Parliament a statement of the
estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government of India for that year,
in this part referred to as the ‘annual financial statement’.
●  The General Budget is usually presented in the Lok Sabha by Finance
Minister on the last working day of February.
● Rajya Sabha can only discuss the budget.
FUNDS OF INDIA
Consolidated fund of India (Article 266-a) It is the fund into which all
receipts and revenues of the government flows.
● All expenditure from it, is authorised by appropriation bill.
Public Account of India (Article 266-b)
●  In this account public money is put in and governments acts only as
banker. It is operated by executive action.
Contigency Fund of India (Article 267) It is kept at disposal of President to
meet unforeseen expenditure. It is opened by secretary, ministry of Finance on
behalf of the President.
Parliamentary Committees



● Parliamentary committees are of two kinds – Standing Committes and Ad
Hoc Committees. The former are permanent (constituted every year or
periodically) and work on a continuous basis, while the latter are temporary
and cease to exist on completion of the task assigned to them.
Important standing Committees
1. Public Account Committee : This committee was setup first in 1921
under the provisions of the Government of India Act of 1919 and has since
been in existence. At present, it consist of 22 members (15 from the Lok
Sabha and 7 from the Rajya Sabha). The chairman of the committee is
appointed from amongst its member by speaker.
● The function of the committee is to examine the annual audit reports of the
comptroller and Auditor General of India.
2. Estimate Committee : The origin of this committee can be traced to the
standing financial committee set up in 1921. Originally, it has 25 members
but in 1956 its membership was raised to 30. All 30 members are from Lok
Sabha only. The chairman of the committee is appointed from amongst its
member by speaker.
The function of the committee is to examine the estimates included in the
budget and suggest ‘economics’ in the public expenditure. Hence, it has been
described as a ‘Continuous economy committee’.
3. Committee on Public Undertakings : This committee was created in
1964 on the recomendation of the Krishna Menon Committee. Originally it
had 15 members however in 1974. Its membership was raised to 22 [15 are
from the Lok Sabha & 7 from the Rajya Sabha].
● The functions of the committee are to examine the reports and accounts of
public undertakings. Also to examine the reports of the Comptroller and
Auditor General on Public Undertakings.
COUNCIL OF MINISTERS
●  Article 74 provides that there shall be council of ministers with Prime
Minister as its head to aid and advice the President, who shall in exercise of
his functions, act in accordance with such advice.
● The advice given to President by the council of ministers can't be inquired
into by any court of law.
●  Article 75 has provisions relating to qualifications, appointment, oath,
tenure, responsibilities and salaries and emoluments of the ministers.



●  The Prime minister shall be appointed by the President and the other
ministers shall be appointed by the President on the advice of PM.
●  The President shall administer the oath and secrecy of the office to the
ministers.
● The minister shall hold office during the pleasure of the President.
● The minister who is not a member of either house, he can't remain minister
after 6 months, if he doesnot become the member of it.
● Article 75 entails the principles of collective and individual responsibilities
of ministers.
● All ministers are together responsible for their acts to Lok Sabha.
●  If Lok Sabha passes a vote of no confidence motion against council of
ministers, all of them had to resign.
THE STRUCTURE OF COUNCIL OF MINISTERS
● The council of ministers consist of three categories of ministers—
1. Ministers of cabinet rank
2. State ministers
3. Deputy ministers
●  Ministers of Cabinet are real policy maker. They attend the meeting of
cabinet.
● The word ‘Cabinet Ministers’ has been incorporated into the constitution
through the 44th amendment Act
● State Ministers can either hold independent charges or attached to cabinet
ministers.
● State ministers assist to cabinet ministers.
● Deputy ministers don't hold the separate charge.
● Deputy ministers can't attend the cabinet meetings.
● They are paid lesser salary than the cabinet ministers rank.
PRIME MINISTER
● Prime minister is the leader of the lower House of the Parliament.
● He is the real executive authority.
● He is appointed by the President.
● He is the chairman of Niti Ayog, National Integration Council and Inter
State Council.
POWERS OF PRIME MINISTER
● He presides over the meetings of the council of ministers.



● He can call the meeting of cabinet any time.
● He allocates portfolios.
● He can ask a minister to resign.
● He can get any minister dismissed by President.
● He assist the President in appointment of all high officials.
● He summons and decides the agenda of the cabinet meetings.
● He has right to call any file from any ministry .
● He advises the President with regard to the summoning and proroguing of
the sessions of the Parliament.
● He has right to intervene in any debate in the Parliament.
● He can give answer in both the house of Parliament.
● He can participate in debates of Parliament.
● He plays a significant role in shaping the Foreign Policy.
THE STATE EXECUTIVE
● In India, except Jammu and Kashmir all the states have the same pattern of
government as the centre.
● Articles 153 to 167 deal with the state executive.
● Unlike Vice President at centre, there is no provisions for office of Vice-
Governer in the state.
Governor
●  According to Article 153 the constitution provides for an office of the
Governer in the states.
● 7th amendement Act, 1956 facilitated the appointment of the same person
in two or more states.
● A governor is the chief executive head of a state.
● He is the nominal executive head.
● Governor acts as an agent of the central goverment.
● The office of the governor has a dual role.
●  The Constitution lays down the following two qualifications for the
appointment of a person as a Governor (Article 157). (i) He should be a
citizen of India.
(ii) He should have completed the age of 35 years.
●  The constitution lays down the following conditions for the Governor’s
office (Article 158).
(i) He should not be a member of either House of the Parliament or of the
House of the State Legislature.



(ii) He should not hold any other office of profit.
(iii) His emoluments, allowances and privileges shall be determined by the
Parliament of India.
(iv) When the same person is appointed as the Governor of two or more
States, the emoluments and allowances payable to him shall be allocated
among the States in such proportion as determined by the President of India.
(v) His emoluments and allowances should not be diminished during his term
of office.
● The Governor appoints judges of courts below the High Court.
● While appointing High Court judges, President consults the Governor.
● By Article 161, the Governor can grant pardons, reprieves, remissions of
punishment to persons convicted under state laws.
●  The Governor has no power to pardon a sentence of death or remit
sentence by court martial.
● The Governor can recommend President’s rule in the state.
● During President’s rule, he acts as President’s representative and assumes
wide powers.
●  He can dismiss a Legislative Assembly if he is convinced it has lost
majority support.
● He can dissolve the Legislative Assembly.
● He can reserve certain bills for the consideration of the President.
●  He can submit a report to the President in the wake of Constitutional
machinery failure in the state.
●  Article 163 says that the courts can not call in question the matters in
which the Governor chooses to use his discretionary any powers.
● He can also nominate one member of the Anglo-Indian community to the
Legislative Assembly.
● In states having legislative councils, he has the power to nominate One-
sixth members from amongst distinguished persons in art, literature, science
and social services (Article 171).
● Article 200 states that the Governor’s assent is necessary for bills passed
by the state legislature to become laws.
● Article 213 empowers the Governor to issue ordinance.
FINANCIAL POWERS OF THE GOVERNOR
● According to Article 203, no demand for grant can be made except on the
recommendation of the Governor.



●  The Governor administers the contingency fund of the state and can
advance money out of it to meet unforeseen expenses.
DISCRETIONARY POWERS OF THE GOVERNOR
● Reservation of a bill for the consideration of the President.
● Recommendation for the imposition of the President rule in the State.
● While exercising his functions as the administrator of an adjoining Union
Territory (in case of additional charge).
● Appointment of the Chief Minister when no party has clear cut majority in
the State-Legislature.
●  Seeking information from the Chief Minister with regard to the
administrative and legislative matters of the State.
● Dismissal of the Council of Ministers when it can not prove the confidence
of the State Legislative Assembly.
● Dissolution of the State Legislative Assembly if the Council of Ministers
has lost its majority.
THE STATE LEGISLATURE
●  The Legislature of every State consists of Governor and one or two
Houses.
● The Legislatures of Jammu and Kashmir, Bihar, Maharashtra, Telangana,
Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Uttar Pradesh are bicameral i.e., having both
the Legislative Assembly and the Legislative Council. And all the other
states having unicameral legislatues i.e., there exists only the State
Legislative Assembly.
The Legislative Council (Vidhan Parishad)
● As per the Constitution, the number of members of the Legislative Council
is not to exceed one-third of the total strength of the State legislative
Assembly. However, its strength should not be less than 40 either.
● The members of the Legislative Council are derived from various sections
and streams of the society.
(a) Not less than one-third to be elected by the Panchayats, Municipalities,
District Boards, etc.
(b) Not less than one-third to be elected by the Legislative Assembly.
(c) Not less than one-twelfth to be elected by the graduates of three years
standing residing in the State.
(d) Not less than one-twelfth to be elected by the persons having teaching
experience of three years in educational institutions.



(e) The remainder one-sixth to be nominated by the Governor from among
the distinguished persons of the society in the field of literature, science, arts,
co-operative movement and social services.
● Just like the Upper House at the Centre, the Legislative Council in a State
is never dissolved. The members are elected for a term of 6 years and One-
third of its members retire every two years.
● The council elects a chairman and vice chairman among its member.
● The Parliament, under Article 169, is empowered to create or abolish the
Legislative Council in a State.
Creation and Abolition
● The Parliament under Article 169, is empowered to create or abolish the
Legislative Council in a state.
● If the Legislative Assembly passes a resolution for abolishing or creation
of the Legislative Council by a majority of the total membership of the
assembly and by a majority of not less than 2/3rd of the members present and
voting, the Parliament may approve the resolution by a simple majority.
●  A resolution passed by the Legislative Assembly for the creation or
abolition of its council is not binding on the parliament.
● The Parliament may or may not approve such resolution
Legislative Assembly (Vidhan Sabha) It is also known as lower house, just
like the Lok Sabha.
● Consists of not more than 500 members and not less than 60 members.
● The strength varies according to the population of the state concerned.
● However the Legislative assembly of Sikkim has only 30 members. It has a
term of 5 years but can be dissolved by the Governor earlier.
● Its term can be extended by one year during national emergency.
●  The Governor may nominate one member from the Anglo-Indian
community to this House, if he thinks that the community is not adequately
represented.
CHIEF MINISTER
● Chief Minister is the real executive head of the state governments.
●  His position at the state level is analogous to the position of the Prime
Minister at the centre.
● He is appointed by the governor.
●  Other ministers are appointed by the governor on the advice of Chief
Minister.



● The Governor appoints the leader of the party enjoying the majority in the
Assembly as the Chief Minister.
● A person who in not a member of state legislature can be appointed, but he
has to get himself elected within 6 months otherwise he is removed.
● The governor administers the oath of office and secrecy to the ministers.
Power of Chief Minister
● He advices the Governor.
● He can ask for the resignation of any minister.
● His own resignation brings down fall of the whole council of ministers.
●  He advises the governor with regards to the appointment of important
officials like Advocate General. The chairman and members of the state
public service commission, the state election commissions etc.
● He announces Governments policies on the floor of the House.
Council of Ministers in states
● In a Parliamentary form of government, the council of ministers headed by
the Chief Minister is the executive authority.
● The states under the Indian constitution are organised on the pattern as that
of the centre.
THE ADVOCATE GENERAL
● The Advocate General is the first law officer of a state.
● His office and functions are comparable to that of the Attorney General of
India.
SPECIAL STATUS OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR
● The special status of Jammu and Kashmir is guaranteed in Article 370 of
the Constitution.
● This status has been provided on the basis of an agreement concluded at
the time of Jammu and Kashmir’s accession to India.
●  Jammu and Kashmir has its own Constitution, apart from the Indian
Constitution. Its Constitution was framed by a Constituent Assembly of its
own and came into being on the 26th January, 1957.
● The Parliament can not make law with regard to Jammu and Kashmir on
subjects in the State List.
● The residuary power lies with the Legislature of Jammu and Kashmir and
not with the Parliament. It follows dual citizenship, only the citizens of
Jammu and Kashmir can take part in the elections to the State Assembly and
acquire, own and dispose of immovable property in Jammu and Kashmir.



●  Only national emergency proclaimed on grounds of war or external
aggression shall have automatic extension to Jammu and Kashmir. National
emergency proclaimed on the basis of armed rebellion shall not be
automatically extended to Jammu and Kashmir.
● Apart from the President’s rule, Governor’s rule can also be imposed for a
maximum period of six months, in case of constitutional break-down in the
State.
● The Parliament can not change the name, boundary or territory of Jammu
and Kashmir, without the concurrence of the State Legislature.
● The State Government shall be consulted by the Centre before appointing a
person as the Governor of Jammu and Kashmir.
● No preventive detention law made by the Parliament can have automatic
extension to Jammu and Kashmir.
● The Union has no power to proclaim a financial emergency to Jammu and
Kashmir.
JUDICIARY IN INDIA
The Supreme Court
●  The supreme court of India replaced the federal court which was setup
under the Government of India Act, 1935. It came into existence on January
28, 1950. It stands at the apex of the judicial systems of India.
●  The constitution consists provisions related to the union Judiciary in
Articles 124 to Art. 147 in Part V of the constitution. It consists of one chief
justice and 30 other judges.
● The power to increase or decrease the number of judges in the supreme
court rests with the Parliament.
● The senior most judge of the supreme court is appointed as the chief justice
of India.
● Judges are appointed by the president after consultation with such Judges
of the supreme court and of the High court as the president may deem
necessary.
Qualification
● Must be a citizen of India.
● Has been for atleast ten years as an advocate of a High Court or of two or
more such courts in succession or
● is, in the opinion of the president, a distinguished jurist.
● Has been a judge of high court at least 5 years.



Term
● The Chief Justice & other Judges hold office till 65 years of age.
Removal of Judges :
● A motion seeking the removal of the judge can be preferred before either
house of the parliament.
● If it is to be introduced in the Lok Sabha, it should be signed by not less
than 100 members of the Lok Shaba.
● If it is to be introduced in Rajya Sabha, it should be signed by not less than
50 members.
● The resolution should be supported by a majority of total membership of
both the houses & by 2/3rd majority of the members present and voting.
● The motion can be moved only after a prior notice of 14 days given to the
judge.
●  The judge in question has the right to defend himself or through his
counsel before the judicial committee.
●  The parliament may or may not act upon the report of the judicial
committee.
Jurisdiction
●  Original Jurisdiction : The supreme court settles all disputes between
centre state, State - State etc.
●  There are certain provisions in the constitution which exclude from the
original jurisdiction of the supreme court, certain disputes, the determination
of which is vested in other tribunals.
(i) Disputes specified in the provisions to Article 363 (11)
(ii) Complaints as to interference with inter-state water supplies, referred to
the statutory tribunal mentioned in Article 262.
(iii) Matters referred by the finance commission (Art. 280)
(iv) Adjustment of certain expenses between the unions and the state (Art
290)
Writ Jurisdiction
●  Every individual has the right to move the supreme court directly by
appropriate proceedings for the enforcement of his fundamental rights.
● Article 32 imposes duty on the supreme court to enforce the Fundamental
rights.
Appellate Jurisdiction It is three fold
1. Constitutional — In constitutional matters an appeal lies to the supreme
court if the High court certifies that the case involves a substantial question



of law as to the interpretation of the constitution.
2. Civil – In civil cases, an appeal lies to the Supreme Court if a High Court
certifies that the value of the subject matter of the dispute as fit for appeal to
the supreme court.
3. Criminal– In the criminal cases, an appeal lies to the supreme court if the
High Court :
(i) has withdrawn for trial before itself any case from any subordinate and
has in such trial convicted the accused and sentenced him to death.
(ii) Certifies that the case is fit for appeal to the supreme court.
Advisory Jurisdiction
● If the president seeks the advice of Supreme Court. It is duty bound to give
its opinion.
● The Supreme Court’s decision is not bound to the president.
Revisory Jurisdiction
●  The Supreme court under article 137 is empowered to revive any
judgement or order made by it with a view to removing any mistake or error
that might have crept in the judgement or order. It is a “court of record” as its
decisions are of evidential value & can be used as precedent in any court.
●  The Supreme Court also enjoys the power of judicial review as it can
ensure that the laws passed by legislature and order issued by the executive
do not contravene any provision of the constitutions.
● The supreme court decides disputes regarding the election of the president
and the vice president.
High Court
● According to Article 214 there shall be a High Court for each state.
● The High courts stand at the head of the judiciary in a state.
● Article 215 says that every high court shall be a “Court of Record”.
● Kolkata High Court is the oldest High Court of India.
Appointment of Judges
● According to Article 216, every High Court consists of a Chief Justice and
such other judges as appointed by the president from time to time.
● Our constitution does not fix the number of judges for a High Court.
● Eligibility
(i) He must be a citizen of India.
(ii) He must have held a judicial office in the territory of India for at least 10
years.



(iii) Must have been an advocate of a High Court or two or more such Courts
in succession for atleast 10 years.
(iv) He has worked as a judge of a state high court for at least 5 years.
(v) He should be distinguished jurist in the opinion of the President of India.
Oath : By Governer.
Age of Retirement /tenure : 62 years.
Removal : The judge of the High Courts can be removed from the service in
the very same way as that of the Supreme Court.
Transfer of a Judge
● According to Article 222, The President may after consultation with the
chief justice of India transfer a Judge from one High Court to any other High
Court.
● Consultation with the chief Justice of India (act)
● The opinion provided by the CJI is the binding on the president.
Jurisdiction of the High Court
Original Jurisdiction
● The High Court of presidency towns (Bombay, Calcutta & Madras) have
both original and appellate jurisdiction.
● Only in matters of admiralty. Probate matrinominal and contempt of court.
They have original jurisdication.
Appellate Jurisdiction
● As courts of appeal all High Courts enter to in appeal in civil and criminal
cases from their subordinate courts as well as on their own.
Writ Jurisdiction
●  According to Article 226, the High Courts are given powers of issuing
writs not only for the enforcement of the fundamental Rights, but also for
other purposes.
● The High Courts may issue writs, orders and directions under Article 226.
● The jurisdiction to issue writs under this article is larger in the case of High
Courts than the jurisdiction of the supreme court.
Union Public Service Commission (UPSC)
● The Union Public Service Commission is the central recruiting agency in
India. It is an independent constitutional body in the sense that it has been
directly created by the constitution.
●  Article 315 to 323 in Part XIV of the Constitution contain elaborate
provisions regarding the composition, appointment and removal of members



along with the independence, power and functions of the UPSC.
● The chairman and members of the Commission hold office for a term of
six years or until they attain the age of 65 years, whichever earlier.
● They can also be removed before the expiry of their term by the president.
State Public Service Commission
●  Parallel to the UPSC at the centre, there is a state public service
Commission in state under same set of Articles (i.e., Article 315 to 323)
●  A SPSC consist of a chairman and other members appointed by the
governor of the state.
● The chairman and members of the commission hold office for a term of six
years or until they attain the age of 62 years.
● The chairman and members of the commission can be removed only by the
president (and not by the governor)
The Centre-State Relation
● Articles 245 -255, part-IX of the constitution contains provisions relating
to the legislature relations between centre and states.
● Centre-state relations can be studied under three categories.
The legislative relations
●  There are three lists under 7th schedule - The Union list -100 subjects
(earlier - 97) The state list -61 subjects (earlier 66) The concurrent list -52
subjects (earlier -47)
● Both centre & state can make laws on concurrent list but in case of any
conflict between state & centre, the central law will prevail.
● Article 248 vests the residuary Powers in the parliament.
● According to Article 249, if the Rajya Sabha passes a resolution, supported
by 2/3rd of the members present & voting, that it is necessary or expedient in
the national interest that the Parliament should make laws with respect to any
matter enumerated in the state list specified in the resolution.
●  According to Article 250, while the Emergency is in operation the
Parliament shall have power to make laws for the whole or any part of the
territory of India with respect to all matters in the state list.
● According to Article 252, if the legislatures of two or more states passes a
resolution to the effect that it is desireable to have a law passed by the
parliament on any matter in the state list, it shall be lawful for the parliament
to make laws regulating that matter.



● According to Article 253, that empowers the parliament to make any law
for the whole or any part of the territory of India for implementing the
treaties and international agreements and conventions even if the subject
covered by such treaties and agreement fall within the state list.
● According to Article 356, the Parliament is empowered to make laws with
respect to all the matters in the state list when the Parliament declares that the
state Governments can’t be carried on in accordance with the provisions of
the constitution and the parliament assumes all the legislative functions of
the states.
Centre’s control over the state legislation
● Any legislation passed by the state legislature for the acquisition of private
property for public purposes will not become a law unless it has the assent of
the Parliament (Art. 31A)
● According to Article 200 the Governor is empowered to reserve a Bill for
the president’s consideration.
●  Under this Article the Governor has been directed to reserve any Bill
affecting the dignity any functioning of the High Court for the President’s
consideration.
● According to Article 304 (b), the state legislature is authorised to pass Bill
regarding the imposition of reasonable restrictions on the freedom of trade,
commerce and intercourse within the state in public interest. Any such Bill
requires the president’s prior approval for its introduction in the House.
Administrative Relations
● Administrative relations are given under Article 256 to 263, Part IX.
●  The executive powers of the state should be so exercised as to ensure
compliance with the laws of the union Parliament (Art 256).
●  Powers of the state do not impede or prejudice executive power of the
union (Art. 257)
●  Under Article 258(2), the Parliament is given power to use the state
machinery to enforce the union laws.
● State governments can suspend officials of All India Services in case of
untoward happenings.
● State Government can’t take any disciplinary action against the officials of
All India Services.
●  The centre can deploy military and paramilitary forces in a state even
against the wishes of the state Government.



●  Under Article 262, the Parliament has power to adjudicate in case of
disputes related to inter-state rivers.
●  Under Article 263, the president has power to constitute a council to
resolve the disputes or to discuss the matters of common interests between
the states or between the state and union.
● The president has constituted three such councils so far. these are —
1. Central council of health
2. Central council of Local self Government
3. Transport development council.
Financial Relations
● Articles 268 to 293 in part IX are concerned with financial relations.
● The constitution makes a distinction between the legislative powers to levy
a tax and the financial power to appropriate the proceeds of the tax.
● The residuary powers regarding taxes belongs to the parliament
● The state has little power regarding taxes.
● The state depends on centre for financial resources.
● The chief sources of finance is grants-in-aid from the centre.
● Under article 269, taxes levied & collected by the union Governments but
assigned to the states.
● Under Article 270, taxes levied & collected by the union and distributed
between the union and the states.
● Centre has powers to grant loans and provide Grant-in-aids to the states
specially for promoting the welfare of SCs & STs
Finance Commission
● Article 280 of the constitution of India provides for a Finance Commission
as a quasi-judicial body. It constituted by the president of India every fifth
year or at such earlier time as he considers necessary.
● Finance Commission consists of a chairman and four other members to be
appointed by the president.
● Function of the commission is to make recomendations to the president of
India on following matters.
1. The distribution of the net proceeds of taxes to be shared between the
centre and the states and the allocation between the states of the respective
shares of such proceeds.
2. The principles that should govern the grants-in-aid to the states by Centre.
3. The measures needed to augment the consolidated fund of a state to
supplement the resources of the panchayats and the municipalities in the state



on the basis of the recommendations made by the state finance commission.
Inter-state Council
● According to Article 263, If at any time it appears to the President that the
Public interests would be served by the establishment of a council charged
with the duty of—
(a) Inquiring into and advising upon disputes which may have arisen during
investigating and discussing subjects in which some or all of the states or the
union and one or more of the states, have a common interest, or
(b) making recommendations upon any such subject and, in particular,
recommendations for the better coordination of policy and action with
respect to that subject.
North-Eastern council
●  States — Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura,
Arunachal Pradesh.
Its functions are same like the zonal councils.
● On the recommendations of Sarkaria Commission, under the leadership of
V.P. Sing Janata Dal Government established a interstate council in 1990.
Following are the members in it—
(i) Chairman – Prime Minister
(ii) Chief Ministers of all states
(iii) Chief Ministers of Delhi & Puducherry
(iv) Six Union Cabinet Ministers including the Home Minister
● The council should held at least three meetings in a year.
●  The council has a permanent committee. It is established in 1996. the
committee has the following members —
(i) Chairman – Home Minister
(ii) Five Cabinet Ministers
(iii) Nine Chief Ministers
● The council has a secretariat to help it. It is called the inter-state council
secretariat. It is established in 1991.
National Commission for SCs
● The National Commission for Scheduled Castes is a constitutional body in
the sense that it is directly established by Article 338 of the constitution.
● The commission consists of chairperson, a vice chairperson and three other
members to be appointed by the president.



●  The commission investigate all matters relating to the constitutional
safeguards for the SCs and to report to the President on their working.
National Commission for STs
●  Like the National Commission for schedules castes, the National
Commission for schedule Tribes (STs) is also a constitutional body in the
sense that it is directly established by Article 338-A of the constitution.
●  A separate National Commission for STs by bifurcating the existing
combined National Commission for SCs and STs was done by passing the
89th Constitutional Amendment Act of 2003.
● The commission consists of chairperson, a vice-chariperson and three other
members to be appointed by the president.
Emergency Provisions
● The President is empowered to promulgate three kinds of emergencies—
1. On the ground of threat to the security of India by a war or an external
aggression or an Armed rebellion (Article 352).
2. On the ground of failure of the constitutional machinery in a state (Art.
356)
3. Financial Emergency (Art. 360)
National Emergency (Article 352)
●  If the president is satisfied that a grave emergency exists where by the
security of India or of any part of the territory thereof is threatened, whether
by a war or an external aggression or an armed rebellion, he may proclaim a
state of emergency for the whole of India or a part thereof.
●  Such a proclaimation of emergency can be varied or revoked by the
president subsequently.
●  The president can issue a proclamation of emergency only when the
decision of the union cabinet is conveyed to him only in written.
● This proclamation is subject to judicial review and its constitutionality can
be questioned in a court of law on the grounds of malafide.
●  The proclamation of emergency must be approved by the parliament
within the period of one month. If it is approved it will continue for six
months. It can be extended for an indefinite period with an approval by the
parliament for every six months. It has been proclaimed three times so far—
1962, 1971 and 1975.
●  President can suspend the operation of Fundamental Rights during this
type of emergency (Except Art. 20 & 21)



● Article 19 can only be suspended in case of external emergency and not in
the case of internal emergency.
Effects of the proclamation of Emergency
● During emergency the president is empowered to issue directions to the
states as to the manner in which their executive power is to be exercised.
●  During emergency, the parliament can enact laws even on the subjects
enumerated under the state list.
● Distribution of the power is suspended.
● Parliament can extend the life of the Lok Sabha beyond the five year term
for a period not exceeding one year at a time.
● The life of the state legislative Assemblies can also be extended, by law, by
the parliament in a similar manner.
● The citizens can’t move the courts for this.
● The other fundamental Rights may be suspended.
● Article 20 & 21 can’t be suspended.
State Emergency (Article 356)
●  If the president, on receipt of report from the Governer of state or
otherwise is satisfied that a situation has arisen in which the government of
the state can’t be carried on in accordance with the provisions of this
constitution, he may issue a proclamation.
(a) assume to himself all or any of the functions of the Government of the
state and all or any of the powers vested in or exercisable by the governor.
(b) declare that the powers of the legislature of the state shall be exercisable
by or under the authority of parliament.
● The parliament can confer on the president the power to make laws for the
state.
●  The proclamation of the president’s rule should be approved by the
parliament within two months.
●  If approved, it remains in force for six months from the date of
proclamation of the state emergency. It can be extended for a maximum
period of three years with the approval of the parliament every six months.
Financial Emergency (Article 360)
● The president can proclaim financial emergency if he is satisfied that the
financial stability or the credit of India or any part there of is threatened.
●  Such a proclamation must be approved by the parliament within two
months.



●  During financial emergency, the president can issue directions for the
reduction of salaries and allowances of all or any class of persons serving
under the state.
● Once approved it remains in force till revoked by the president.
● No Emergency under Article 360 has been issued so far.
Panchayati Raj
Panchayati Raj : Panchayati Raj is a subject of state list
● State Government have right to establish and election of it.
●  Part IX of the constitution relates to it. It received constitutional status
through the 73rd constitutional Amendment Act of 1992.
●  At the central level, the ministry of Rural Development looks after the
matters relating to the Panchayati Raj.
Balwant Rai Mehta Committee
● The Government of India appointed a committee in 1957.
●  This committee was set up to examine the work of community
Development Programme (1952), and National Extension Service (1953).
● The committee submitted its report in 1958.
Ashok Mehta Committee
● The Janata Government appointed a committee in 1977 on Panchayati Raj
institutions under the chairmanship of Ashok Mehta.
L.M. Singhvi Committee
● Appointed by the Rajiv Gandhi Government in 1986.
● Chairman L.M. Singhvi
73rd Amendment Act of 1992
● The Act gives a constitutional status to the Panchayati Raj institutions.
● The Act has added new part IX and 11th schedule to the constitution. It is
entitled as “The Panchayats” and consists of provisions from Articles 243 to
243 (O). It consists 29 functional items of the Panchayats and deals with
Article 243 (G).
● The compulsory provisions of the Act are to be included in the state laws
creating the new panchayati Raj System.
● The voluntary provision may be included at the discretion of the state.
Chief Characteristics
● This Panchayati Raj system is for only those states having population of
more than 20 lakhs.
● The tenure of every Panchayat should be 5 years.



● The election of the new Panchayat should be held before the expiry of its
tenure or within 6 months of its dissolution.
● Every Panchayat should have a chairperson.
● The total number of the seats in every panchayat should be filled by direct
election.
● Seat should be reserved for SCs & STs.

● 1/3rd of the seats should be reserved for women.
● Panchayat can levy collect and appropriate taxes duties tolls and fees as its
suits better.
● State also provide grants-in-aid to Panchayat.
●  All elections of Panchayats are conducted, supervised, directed and
controlled by the state election commission.
● The state election commissioner is appointed by the Governor.
● He can be removed on the same manner as the judge of the High Court.
Urban Local Government
● The system of urban local government was constitutionalised through the
74th constitutional Amendment Act of 1992.
●  This Act has added a new Part IX-A to the Constitution of India. It is
entitled ‘The Municipalities’ and consist of provisions from Article 243-P to
243 -ZG.
● This schedule contains eighteen functional items of municipalities.
● The act gave constitutional status to the municipalities.
Co-operative Societies
●  The 97th Constitutional Amendment Act of 2011 gave a Constitutional
status and protection to co-operative societies.
● In this context, it made the following three changes in the constitution :
(a) It made the right to form cooperative societies a fundamental right.
(b) It included a new Directive Principle of state policy on promotion of co-
operative societies
(c) it added a new Part IX-B in the Constitution which is entitled “The co-
operative societies”.
Election Commission
● The Election Commission is a permanent and an independent body. It is
established by the constitution of India.
● The elections to the Panchayats and the Municipalities in the states are
conducted by state election commission.



● The election commission consists of one chief election commissioner and
two other election commissioners.
● The powers of election commissioners have been made equal to those of
the chief election commissioner.
Functions :
● The election commission works under the overall supervisions of the chief
election commissioner. It conducts and supervises elections. It prepares
guidelines for a code of conduct for candidates, political parties and voters. It
fixes the limit of election expenses and examines the accounts of the
electoral expenditures. It decides the election symbols for the political parties.
It settles the election disputes and petitions referred to it by the president or
the governor.
● The term of the chief election commissioner is for 6 years or 65 years of
age whichever is earlier.
● He can be removed from the office in the same manner as the judges of the
supreme court.
● He is not eligible for reappointment.
● His salaries and allowances are met from the consolidated fund of India.
NON CONSTITUTIONAL BODIES
National Human Rights Commission
●  The National Human Rights Commission is a statutory body. It was
established in 1993 by a legislation enacted by the parliament.
Namely the protection of Human Rights Act, 1993.
●  The Commission is a multi-member body consisting of a chairman and
other four members.
●  The chairman should be a retired chief justice of India, and members
should be serving or retired judges of the supreme court, a serving or retired
chief justice of a high court and two persons having knowledge or practical
experience with respect to human rights.
● The chairman and members hold office for a term of five years or until
they attain the age of 70 years.
Central Information Commission
●  The central information commission was established by central
government in 2005. It was constituted through an official Gazette
notification under the provisions of the Right to Information Act (2005)



● The Central Information Commission is a high powered independent body
which inter alia looks into the complaints made to it and decide the appeals
●  The commission consist of a Chief Information Commissioner and not
more than ten Information Commissioners.
● They appointed by the president for a term of 5 years or until they attain
the age 65 years, whichever is earlier.
RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT (RTI) It is a statutory (and not a
constitutional) Act. It was passed in 2005 to set out the practical regime of
Right to Information for citizens to secure access to information under the
control of public authorities, in order to promote transparency and
accountability in the working of every public authority. It also provides for
the constitution of a central Information commission and states Information
Commissions and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. RTI
Act, 2005 extends to the whole of India except the state of Jammu and
Kashmir.
CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION
● The central vigilance commission (CVC) is the main agency for preventing
corruption in the central government. It was established in 1964 by an
executive resolution of the central government.
●  Its establishment was recommended by the Santhanam Committee on
prevention of corruption (1962-64) originally the CVC was neither a
constitutional body nor a statutory body. Recently, in September 2003, the
Parliament enacted a law conferring statutary status on the CVC.
●  The CVC is a multi-member body consisting of a Central Vigilance
Commissioner and not more than two vigilance commissioner.
● They are appointed by the president.
● They hold office for a term of four years or until they attain the age of sixty
five years, which ever is earlier.
CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (CBI)
●  The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) was set up in 1963 by a
resolution of Ministry of Home Affairs.
● Later, it was transfered to the Ministry of Personnel and now it enjoys the
status of an attached office.
●  The establishment of the CBI was recommended by the Santhanam
Committee on Prevention of Corruption (1962-64)



● CBI is not a statutory body. It derives its power from the Delhi Special
Police Establishment Act, 1946.
LOKPAL AND LOKAYUKTAS
LOKPAL
● The Administrative Reforms Commission (ARC) of India (1966- 1970)
recommended the setting up of two special authorities designated as Lokpal
and Lokayukta for the redressal of citizens grievances.
● The Lokpal would deal with complaints against ministers and secretaries at
central and state levels.
● According to the ARC, the Lokpal would be appointed by the president
after consultation with the chief justice of India, the speaker of Lok Sabha
and the chairman of Rajya Sabha.
●  Ist time Lokpal bill was introduced in Parliament in May 1968, by the
Congress Government headed by Indira Gandhi.
LOKAYUKTAS
● According to ARC Report (1966- 70) the Lokaukta (one at the centre and
in every state) would deal with the complaints against other specified higher
official which is not included in Lokpal.
 



 
 Election UPSC Finance SC/ST CAG CIC CVC

Commission Commission Commission NHRC
Type Constitutional Constitutional Constitutional Constitutional Constitutional Statutory Statutory Statutory
Article/Act Article 324 Articles 315 Article 280 Article 338, Article 148 Protection of Right to Parliament act

to 323 338A Human Information Act 2003
Rights Act, (2005).
1993

Composition chief EC and chairman and chairman and chairperson, a Single body chairman and Chief chairperson) and
other ECs as other four other vice - 4 members Information not more than 2
determined members as members chairperson Commissioner members
by President determined and 3 (IC) and not
At present: 1 by President members more than 10
CEC + 2 ECs  ICs

Appointed by By president By president By president By president By president by president President on the President on the
recommended recommendation recommendation
by 6 - of a committee of a 3 - member
member consisting of the committee –
committee – PM, the LOO in PM, Home
PM, Speaker, the LS and a minister, LOO
the Deputy Cabinet Minister in the Lok
Chairman of Sabha.
the RS, LOO
in both the
Houses,
Home
Minister

Term of Office 6 years or 6 years or 6 years or until 6 years or 6 years or five years or 5 years or until 4 years or until
until age of until age of age of 65 years until age of until age of until they age of 65 years age of 65 years
65 years 65 years 65 years 65 years attain the age

of 70 years
Removal On the same By president President President On the same President President President

grounds as a grounds as a
judge of the judge of the
SC SC

Reappointment - not eligible Reappointment - not eligible not eligible - not eligible for
for further possible for further for further further
employment office office employment
in the
Government
of India or a
state

 
 
 
 



###GEOGRAPHY###
UNIVERSE AND SOLAR SYSTEM
Universe
● The vast surrounding space is called Universe. It incorporates everything
that exists, the stars, planets, satellite as well as our earth and all the objects
on it.
● Light year and Parsec are the units of measuring distances in the Universe.
● One Light year is the distance travelled by light in one year.
● The nearest star to the earth ‘Alpha Centuari’ is about 4.3 light years away
from the earth.
● The science dealing with the nature and origin of the Universe is known as
Cosmology.
Galaxy
● A galaxy is a vast collection of billion of stars, dust and hydrogen gas,
isolated in space from similar system.
● The two most important galaxies in the Universe are Milky Way Galaxy
and Andromeda Galaxy.
● Our own Sun and its family of planets belong to the Milky Way Galaxy.
● Three basic shapes of galaxies are :
(i) Spiral Galaxy, (ii) Elliptical Galaxy, (iii) Regular Galaxy
● Milky Way galaxy is spiral type of galaxy.
● Indian name of Milky Way galaxy is ‘Akash Ganga’.
● Some of the brightest galaxies are elliptical galaxies.
Stars
● Stars are the heavenly bodies like the Sun that are extremely hot and have
light of their own. Stars are made up of vast clouds of hydrogen gas, helium
and dust.
● The star which lies immediately above the earth’s North Pole and around
which all other stars seem to revolve is called Pole Star.
Life of Stars : Stars pass through a definite evolutionary sequence. The first
step in the formation of a star from gases is the Protostar.
(a) A Protostar : It is formed by the gravitational contraction of gases
present in the Galaxy. A Protostar is a highly condensed cloud of gases
mainly hydrogen and helium.



(b) Red Giants : The continued Nuclear fusion upset the overall equilibrium
of the star and to readjust it star’s outer region expands while the core
shrinks. Due to the large expansion of the outer shell, the star becomes very
big, and its colour changes to red.
(c) Novae and Supernovae : A giant star phase may end in a Novae/
Supernovae stage. These are stars whose brightness increase suddenly by ten
to twenty magnitudes or more due to a partial or outright explosion in the
star. When brightness increases to 20 magnitudes or more, it is called a
Supernovae.
(d) White dwarfs : A Novae/Supernovae explosion in a small star like our
Sun (stars lighter than 1.2 solar mass) may leave behind a very dense core of
that state. A star of this size cools and contracts to become a White Dwarf.
(e) Neutron star : A supernovae explosion in a star bigger than the Sun but
not more than twice as big, may leave behind an extremely dense, residual

core of that star, reaching a density of 1014 grams/ cm3, known as Neutron
Star.
(f) Pulsar : A spinning neutron star emits radio waves and is called a Pulsar.
(g) Black Holes : A black hole is an object with such a strong gravitational
field that even light cannot escape from its surface. Black holes are formed
from neutron stars after the Supernoval explosions of big stars.
Protostar Red Giants Black Holes Pulsar Neutron Star White dwarf Novae/
Supernovae
Big Bang Theory
● The Big Bang Theory formed in 1972, according to this theory every thing
in the universe emerged from a point known as singularity, 15 billion years
ago..
Goldilocks Zone It is an area of space in which a planet is just the right
distance from its home star so that its surface is neither too hot nor too cold.
The conditions in the Goldilocks zone are just right so that liquid water
remains on the surface of the planet without freezing or evaporating out into
space.
Terrestrial planet are more likely to lie in the Goldilocks zone. It is also
called as habitable zone or life Zone.
THE SOLAR SYSTEM
● The solar system consists of the Sun, the eight planets and their satellites
and various other smaller heavenly bodies such as asteroids, comets and



meteors.
The Sun
● The sun is a star. It is the star around which the earth and other planets

revolve. It is the nearest star to the earth. It is at a distance of 150×106
kilometres from the earth.
●  Light travelling at a speed of 300,000 km. per second, takes about 8
minutes to reach us from the Sun.
● The next nearest star to earth is “Alpha Centuari”.
● The Sun is mainly composed of hydrogen. The glowing surface of the Sun
which we see is called ‘Photosphere’.
●  Above the photospheres is the red cloud ‘Chromosphere’. Beyond the
chromospheres is the ‘Corona’, which is visible during eclipses.
●  The outward stream of protons flowing out from the corona are called
‘Solar winds’, which is made up of plasma.
● The earth’s Magnetosphere or Van Allen belts, as they were earlier called,
acts as a shield and deflects the Solar winds.
●  ‘Sun spots’ are dark patches notched on the surface of the Sun. They
appear dark because they are cooler i.e. they have a temperature of about
1500°C.
The Moon
● The Moon’s diameter is onefourth of Earth diameter.
● Gravitational Pull in 1/6th of the Earth.
● Its orbit around the earth in elliptical orbit.
●  Distance between the Earth and the Moon is 3,82500 km. approx.
(According to NASA)
● At Perigee the point at which the moon is closest to the Earth, the distance
is approximately 3,60000 km.
● At Epogee the point at which the moon is farthest to the earth, the distance
is approximately 4,05,000 km. (According to NASA).
● The Moon is 1/4th size of the Earth.
●  The Moon take 27 day, 7 hrs, 43 min. and 11.47 sec. to complete one
revolution around the Earth.
● The Moon in the only satellite of the Earth.
●  The Moon rotates on its axis in exactly the same time as that of its
revolution. That's why we see only one part of the moon.
● We can see only 59% of its surface.



●  There is no atmosphere on the moon. The reflected light by the moon
reaches on the Earth in 1.3 seconds. It has a low albedo.
The Earth It is the only planet where life exists. It is also called ‘Blue Planet’.
It is the densest of all Planet.
● Perihelian is the nearest position of the Earth to the Sun.
● The Earth reaches its perihelion on January 3 every year at a distance of
about 147 million km.
● Aphelian is the farthest position of the Earth from the Sun.
● The Earth reaches its aphelian on july 4, when the earth is at a distance of
152 million km. It is also called ‘Green Planet’ because of ecology.
● Venus is the nearest planet to the Earth.
● The Earth revolves around the sun at a speed of 29.8 km/second.
Eclipse
●  An eclipse is an astronomical event that occurs when an astronomical
object is temporarily obscured, either by passing into the shadow of another
body or by having another body pass between it and the viewer.
Solar Eclipse
● As observed from the Earth, a solar eclipse occurs when the Moon passes
in front of the Sun.
● The type of solar eclipse event depends on the distance of the Moon from
the Earth during the event.
● A total solar eclipse occurs when the Earth intersects the umbra portion of
the Moon’s shadow.
● When the umbra does not reach the surface of the Earth, the Sun is only
partially occulted, resulting in an annular eclipse.
● Partial solar eclipses occur when the viewer is inside the penumbra.
Lunar Eclipse
● Lunar eclipses occur when the Moon passes through the Earth’s shadow.
● Since this occurs only when the Moon is on the far side of the Earth from
the Sun, lunar eclipses only occur when there is a full moon.
● There are three types of lunar eclipses :
● Penumbral, when the Moon crosses only the Earth’s penumbra;
● Partial, when the Moon crosses partially into the Earth’s umbra;
● Total, when the Moon crosses entirely into the Earth’s umbra.
Planets
● Planets are solid heavenly bodies which revolve around the Sun in closed
elliptical paths.



● A Planet is made up of rock and metal.
● The Planets move around the Sun from west to east.
● There are eight major Planets including earth.
Pluto (Yama) is not a planet now, Pluto is considered as Dwarf planet :
Pluto was discovered by Clyde Tombaugh in 1930.
The redefinition of planet by the International Astronomical Union (IAU) on
August 24, 2006 states that, in the Solar System, a planet is a celestial body
that
● orbit around the Sun.
●  has sufficient mass so that it assumes a hydrostatic equlibrium (nearly
round) shape.
● has cleared the neighbourhood around its orbit.
●  A non-satellite body fulfilling the first two rule is classified as a Dwarf
planet. So, Pluto is considered as Dwarf planet.
●  According to the definition, there are currently eight planets and five
Dwarf planets known in the Solar System. The 5 Dwarf planets are Pluto,
Ceres, Eris, Makemake and Haumea.
● Pluto has been given the number 134340.
Asteroids : Asteroids are very small planets of rock and metal which revolve
around the Sun mainly between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter.
Comets : A comet is a collection of gas and dust which appears as a bright
ball of light in the sky with a long glowing tail.
Meteors : Meteors are the heavenly bodies from the sky which are seen as a
bright streak of light in the sky. The meteors are also called as shooting stars.
Meteorite : A meteor which does not burn completely on entering the earth’s
atmosphere and lands on earth surface is known as Meteorite.
International Date Line (IDL)
● The International Date Line (IDL) is an imaginary line on the surface of
the Earth, that runs from the north to the south pole and demarcates one
calendar day from the next. It passes through the middle of the Pacific Ocean,
roughly following the 180° longitude but it deviates at Aleutian Islands, Fiji,
Samoa and Gilbert Islands.
●  The International Date line is on the opposite side of the Earth Prime
Meridian.
● The Prime Meridian helps to define Universal Time and is the meridian
from which all other time zones are calculated.



● A traveler crossing the International Date Line eastbound (i.e., from Japan
to USA) subtracts one day, or 24 hours, so that the calendar date to the west
of the line is repeated after the following midnight.
● Crossing the IDL westbound results in 24 hours being added, advancing
the calendar date by one day.
Prime Meridian : It is the mean solar time at the Royal ob in Greenwich
London.
●  GMT is formally used as the international civil time standard now
superseded in that function by coordinated universal time.
● The modern form of mean solar time at 0° longitude.
● Prime meridian passes through these countries :
1. U.K 2. Spain 3. France 4. Algeria 5. Burkino Faso 6. Ghana 7. Togo 8.
Mali 9. Antarctica (South Pole)
Tropic of Cancer It is an imaginary line in Northern hemisphere. It can be
drawn at 23.5 north to the equator.
● Tropic of cancer passes through these countries :
1. USA 2. Mexico 3. Bahamas 4. Mali 5. Mauritania 6. Niger
7. Algeria 8. Chad 9. Libya 10. Saudi Arabia 11. Egypt 12. UAE 13. India
14. Bangladesh 15. Myanmar 16. China 17. Oman
Tropic of Capricorn It is an imaginary line in southern hemisphere. It can be
drawn at 23.5 South to the equator. It passes through these countries —
1. Chile 2. Argentina 3. Paraguay 4. Brazil 5. Namibia 6. Botswana 7. South
Africa 8. Medagascar 9. Mozambique 10. Australia
Equator It passes through these countries —
1. Ecuador 2. Colombia 3. Brazil 4. Gabon 5. Congo 6. Zaire 7. Somalia 8.
Uganda 9. Kenya 10. Indonesia 11. Kiribati 12. Maldives 13. Sao Tome and
Principe
EARTH’S MOVEMENTS
(i) Rotation : Earth rotates on its own axis that is tilted at an angle of 23½°
to the vertical. It spins from west to east once in every 23 hours, 56 minutes
and 4.9 seconds.
● The linear velocity of rotation varies, achieving a maximum of 1690 km/hr
at the equator, reducing gradually to zero at the poles.
Effects of Earth’s Rotation
● We have day and night.
● A difference of 1 hour between two meridians which are 15° apart.



● Deflection of ocean currents and winds.
● Rise and fall of tides every day.
(ii) Revolution : Earth revolves round the Sun once in every 365¼ days.
● Earth revolves on an elliptical orbit at a speed of 106,560 km/ hr. As it is
not possible to show a quarter of a day in the calendar, a normal year is taken
to be 365 days, and an extra day is added every four years in a leap year.
Effects of Revolution
● Change of seasons.
● Variation in the lengths of day and night at different times of the year.
● Shifting of wind belts.
● Determination of latitudes.
TILT OF EARTH’S AXIS
● The axis of Earth is inclined to the plane of ecliptic at an angle of 66½°. It
gives rise to different seasons and varying lengths of day and night.
● The Sun is vertically overhead at the equator on two days each year i.e. on
March 21st and September 23rd.
● These days are called equinoxes meaning ‘equal nights’.
●  After the March equinox, the Sun appears to move northwards and is
vertically at the Tropic of Cancer on June 21st. This is known as the Summer
Solstice.
● During summer solstice, the Northern hemisphere will have its longest day
and the shortest night.
● By December 22nd, the Sun is overhead at the Tropic of Capricorn.
● This is the Winter Solstice.
● In the Winter Solstice the Southern hemisphere will have its longest day
and shortest the night.
LATITUDES AND LONGITUDES
● Latitude : Latitude is the angular distance of a point on the earth’s surface,
measured in degrees from the centre of the earth. Imaginary lines joining the
places of same latitude are called parallels of latitude since they are parallel
to a line, the Equator, which lies midway between the poles. These parallels
of latitude are actually circles on the globe, becoming smaller poleward.
● Some important parallels are :
(i) 0° latitude : Equator
(ii) 23½°N : Tropic of Cancer
(iii) 23½°S : Tropic of Capricorn



(iv) 66½°N : Arctic Circle
(v) 66½°S : Antarctic Circle
● The parallel of 60° is half of the Equator in length and 75° is ¼th of the
Equator.
● Longitude : Longitude is the angular distance measured in degrees along
the equator east or west of the Prime Meridian.
● On the globe the lines of longitude are drawn as a series of semi-circles
that extend from the North Pole to the South Pole through the Equator.
● They are also called meridians. The Prime Meridian (0°) is that meridian
which passes through the
Greenwich, near London and from which all other meridians radiate
eastwards and westwards up to 180°.
● 1° of latitude or longitude represents 111 km approx.
●  This distance is true for the longitudes along the equator only since the
distance between the longitudes gradually decreases towards the poles to 0
km.
STRUCTURE OF THE EARTH
● The interior of Earth is divided into 5 important layers. Chemically, Earth
can be divided into the crust, upper mantle, lower mantle, outer core, and
inner core.
● The geologic component layers of Earth are at the following depths below
the surface :
Core
● The inner most layer of the Earth is called the core. It is also known as
metallic core.
● The core is divided into two parts, a solid inner core with a radius of~1,220
km and a liquid outer core extending beyond it to a radius of ~ 3,400 km.
● The core is thus believed to largely be composed of iron
(80%), along with nickel and one or more light elements, whereas other
dense elements, such as lead and uranium, either are too rare to be significant
or tend to bind to lighter elements and thus remain in the crust.
●  The liquid outer core surrounds the inner core and is believed to be
composed of iron mixed with nickel and trace amounts of lighter elements.
Mantle
● Earth’s mantle extends to a depth of 2,890 km, making it the thickest layer
of Earth.



●  The mantle is composed of silicate rocks that are rich in iron and
magnesium relative to the overlying crust.
● Convection of the mantle is expressed at the surface through the motions
of tectonic plates.
Crust
● The crust ranges from 5-70 km in depth and is the outermost layer.
● The thin parts are the oceanic crust, which underlie the ocean basins (5-10
km) and are composed of dense (mafic) iron magnesium silicate igneous
rocks, like basalt.
● The thicker crust is continental crust, which is less dense and composed of
(felsic) sodium potassium aluminium silicate rocks, like granite.
●  The rocks of the crust fall into two major categories -Sial (Silicate +
Aluminium) and Sima (Silicate + Magnesium).
MAJOR DISCONTINUITY
Moho Discontinuity :Between Crust and Mantle
Conrad Discontinuity :Between outer and Inner Crust
Weichert-Gutenberg Discontinuity : Between Mantle and Core Repetti
Discontinuity :Outer and Inner Mantle
Transition Discontinuity :Outer and Inner Core.
COMPOSITION OF EARTH CRUST

Sr. No. Element By weight (%)
1. Oxygen 46.60%
2. Silicon 27.7%
3. Aluminium 8.1%
4. Iron 5.0%

ROCKS AND SOILS
Rocks
●  Rocks are made up of individual substances, which are called minerals
found mostly in a solid state.
● The metal compounds of rocks is known as ‘ores’.
CLASSIFICATION OF ROCKS



On the basis of the mode of formation, rocks are usually classified into three
major types :
(1) Igneous Rocks
● Igneous rocks are found mostly in the Earth.
● Two-third of the earth's crust is made of these rocks.
● These rocks are ancestors of all other rocks and make up 85 per cent or
more of the earth’s crust.
● Igneous rocks are formed by the cooling, solidification and crystallization
of molten earth materials, known as magma and lava.
●  Igneous rocks are also called as Primary rocks or parent rocks because
these were originated first during the formation of crust through the process
of cooling of the earth surface.
● The igneous rocks are made of silicates (SiO2)
● Igneous rocks are generally hard and water percolates through them with
great difficulty along the joints.
●  Since water does not percolate easily, these rocks are less affected by
chemical weathering.
● These rocks are more prone to mechanical weathering due to their granular
structure.
● These rocks are non-fossiliferous.
On the basis of mode of occurrence, Igneous rocks are classified into two
major groups :
(i) Intrusive Igneous Rocks :
When the rising magma is cooled and solidified below the surface of the
earth, they are known as Intrusive Igneous Rocks. These are further sub-
divided into :
(a) Plutonic Igneous Rocks :
They result from the cooling of magma very deep inside the earth.
Due to very slow cooling at that great depth, large grains are developed, e.g.-
Granite
(b) Hypabyssal Igneous Rocks :
They are formed when magma cools and solidify just beneath the earth
surface.
(ii) Extrusive Igneous Rocks :
These igneous rocks are formed by the cooling and solidification of molten
lava on the earth’s surface. Basalt is the most important example of extrusive
igneous rocks, others being Gabbro and Obridian.



(2) Sedimentary Rocks
● Sedimentary rocks are constituted of sediments, a material from wind or
running water that settle down.
● About 75% of the surface area of the globe is covered by the sedimentary
rocks while rest 25% area is occupied by the igneous and metamorphic
rocks.
● Though sedimentary rocks cover largest area of the earth’s surface, they
constitute only 5% of the composition of the crust while 95% of the crust is
composed of igneous and metamorphic rocks.
● The fossils are found in the layers of sedimentary rocks. A fossil refers to
any part of the once living things preserved in the rock. It may be entire
body, a singe bone or a set of foot-prints.
● The layers of sedimentary rocks hold all reserve of coal, oil and natural
gas.
● Agents like running water, wind and moving ice break them into smaller
pieces and deposits them at new sites where they form new sedimentary
rocks.
● Organically formed sedimentary rocks consists of the remains of animals
and plants. Limestone, chalk and corals are the most common of this type of
sedimentary rocks.
● Chemically formed rocks are formed by the direct precipitation of mineral
matter from solution.
Rock-salt is an example of such rocks. Gypsum is also formed in a similar
manner.
● ‘Sandstone’ is a common sedimentary rock, is formed mainly of quartz
particles cemented together by silica, lime or iron oxide.
● ‘Shale’ is most abundant of all sedimentary rocks. It is compacted silt and
clay. Kaolin and clay minerals are abundant in it.
● Rock gypsum is a white to reddish in colour. Gypsum and rock salt are
formed by the evaporation of sea water and salt lakes.
●  ‘Chalk’ is a calcareous rock made up of microscopic skeletal elements
from a varieties of limes secreting organism. It is composed of almost pure
calcium carbonate.
● Most of the sedimentary rocks are permeable and porous but a few of them
are also non-porous such as clay.
(3) Metamorphic Rocks
● In Greek language the word metamorphic means ‘change of form’.



●  When the original character of the rocks i.e. their colour, texture and
mineral composition is partly or wholly changed, it gives rise to
metamorphic rocks, under favourable conditions of heat and pressure.
● The formation of metamorphic rock refers that in course of time shale may
get changed to slate and schist, limestones to marble, sandstone to quartzite
and granite to gneiss.
Metamorphic rock Made from
Marble — limestone, chalk, dolomite Quartzite — Sandstone Slate — Shale
Graphite and Diamond — Bituminus coal Gneiss — Granite
MOUNTAINS
Mountains
● An uplifted portion of the earth’s surface is called a mountain.
● Fold Mountains : These mountains have originated due to compressional
tectonic forces and have been thrown up to form fold mountains e.g.
Himalayas, Andes, Alps etc.
● On the basis of age the fold mountains can be grouped into.
(i) New or Young Fold Mountains :
Example : The Alps, the Himalayas, the Circum-Pacific Oceanic Mountains,
etc.
(ii) Old Fold Mountains : Example :
The Caledonion and Hercynian mountains of Central Europe, the Pennines,
the Highland of Scotland, etc.
●  These mountains were folded in very ancient times, then subjected to
denudation and uplift; many faults were formed and the layers of the rock
were wrapped. Many mountains exist as relics due to erosion.
● Block Mountains : These mountains are formed when great blocks of the
earth’s crust may be raised or lowered during the late stages of mountain–
building. The Block Mountains have a steep slope towards the rift valley but
the slope on the other side is long and gentle.
●  An old fold mountain may also be left as block mountains due to
continuous denudation.
● The Vosges in France, Black Forest (Rhine valley) in Germany and Salt
Range in Pakistan are cited as typical examples of block mountains.
Volcanic Mountains
●  These mountains are formed by the accumulation of volcanic material.
Well-known examples of this type are Popocatepetle of Mexico, Mount



Raineer of Washington, Lessen Peak of California, the Visuvious of Italy, the
Fujiyama in Japan, the Aconcagna in Chile, Kilimanjaro in Africa, Mt.
Mayon in Philippines, Mt. Merapi in Sumatra etc.
Residual or Dissected Mountains
● They owe their present form due to erosion by different agencies. This type
of Mountains includes, Vindhyachal ranges, Aravallis, Satpura, Eastern and
Western Ghats, Nilgiris, Parasnath, Girnar, Rajmahal. Major Mountain Ranges in
the World.

Range Location Length (km.)
Andes South America 7,200 km
Rockies North America 4,800 km.
Great Dividing Range Australia 3,500 km.
Himalayas India, Nepal 2,400 km.
Atlas North-West Africa 1,930 km.
Western Ghats Western India 1,610 km.
Cavcasus Europe 1,200 km.
Alaska U.S.A. 1,130 km.
Alps Europe 1000 km.

The Soil Profile
● The soil profile consists of the weathered material derived from the rock.
But the bedrock itself does not form a part of it.
● A soil profile generally has three main horizons in it-true soil at the top,
subsoil and the bedrock apart from it.
●  Each horizon is quite distinct from the others by its own physical and
chemical composition, and organic contents produced the long process of
soil formation.
●  Each soil type has physical properties like its colour, texture and the
structure.
● They largely depend upon the nature of the bedrock from which they are
derived.
●  There are five soil forming factors- bedrock, local climate, plant and
animal organisms, elevation and the relief.
Earthquakes



● When the Lithosphere plates move, the surface of the Earth vibrates.
● The vibrations are travelled all round the Earth, these vibrations are called
earthquakes.
● The point of origin of earthquake is called ‘Focus’.
●  The point on the Earth’s surface vertically above the focus is called
‘Epicentre’.
● The waves are recorded by seismograph.
● The magnitude of waves is measured on Richter’s scale.
● The region around the Pacific Ocean is prone to earthquakes.
●  In India, Himalayan region and Ganga-Brahmaputra valley are prone to
earthquakes.
Types of earthquake waves :
There are three types of earthquake waves —
Primary waves (P waves) :
● These waves are longitudinal waves.
●  Travel from the point of happening by the displacement of surrounding
particles.
● They are transmitted through solids, liquids and gases.
● These wave travel fastest.
Secondary waves (S waves) :
● These waves are transverse waves.
● These waves travel through solids only.
● Can't pass through core.
Long waves (L waves) :
● These waves are also called surface waves.
● Travel on Earth’s surface.
● These waves cause maximum destruction.
Volcanoes
● A volcano is an opening in the Earth’s crust.
● Crust allows magma to reach the Earth’s surface.
● The magma that reaches the Earth’s surface is called lava.
● Sometimes magma rises slowly to the surface and spread over a vast area.
● Some plateaus and plains have been formed in this way.
● The top of cone is usually marked by a funnel shaped depression, which is
called crator.
Types of volcanoes : There are three types of volcanoes —
Shield volcanoes :



● The shield volcanoes are the largest of all the volcanoes on the Earth.
● These volcanoes are mostly made up of Basalt.
● They become explosive if water gets into the vent.
● These are formed by quiet eruption of lava with low silica content.
Composite Volcanoes
● These volcanoes are characterised by eruptions of cooler and more viscous
lava than basalt.
● These are made of lava and ash.
● On the basis of frequency of eruption, volcanoes are classified into active,
dormant and extinct volcanoes.
● Active Volcanoes : The volcanoes which continues to erupt periodically
are called active volcanoes.
● Dormant Volcanoes : The volcanoes which are devoid of any activities
for a long time but in which there is a possibility of eruption are called
dormant volcanoes.
● Extinct volcanoes : The volcanoes in which the eruption has completely
stopped and is not likely to occur are called extinct volcanoes.

Active Volcanoes Dormant Volcanoes Extinct Volcanoes
Mount Etna-Sicily island Fujiyama-Japan Kohsultan-Iran Popa-
Stromboli-Lepari island Visuvious-Italy Myanmar Chimborajo-
Cotapaxi-Ecuador Mauna Krakatao- Indonesia Ecuador Aconcagua-
loa-Hawaii island Ojos de Argentina
Salado-Argentina - Chile
boundary
 
ATMOSPHERE
● The atmosphere is an insulating blanket protecting the Earth. It softens the
intense light and heat of the Sun. It’s Ozone layer absorb most of the harmful
ultraviolet rays from the Sun.
Composition
● The atmosphere is composed of various gases and water vapour, and in its
uppermost reaches, it is charged with subatomic particles.
● Of the many constituents, carbon dioxide, dust particles, water vapour and
Ozone are of great importance for the earth’s climatic conditions.
COMPOSITION



Gas Volume
Nitrogen (N2) 78.084
Oxygen (O2) 20.947
Argon (Ar) 00.934
Carbon Dioxide (CO2) 0.0314

 
STRUCTURE OF ATMOSPHERE
● The atmosphere has a layered structure.
●  This is because of density stratification as a result of this lighter gases
move up and denser one settles down.
● The atmosphere can broadly be divided into 5 layers, there are :
(1) Troposphere
● The troposphere is the lowest layer of the atmosphere. It extends roughly to
a height of 8 km. near the Poles and about 18 km. at the equator.
●  Temperature decreases with height, roughly at the rate of 1°C for 165
meters of ascent. This is known as normal lapse rate.
● This layer contains dust particles and over 90 per cent of the earth’s water
vapour.
●  All vital atmospheric processes leading to various climate and weather
conditions take place in this layer.
(2) Stratosphere It lies beyond the Troposphere.
The zone separating the two layers is known as the tropopause.
● The stratosphere extends upto a height of 50 km.
● In the lower part of this layer (upto 20 km) temperature remains constant.
Afterwards it gradually increases upto a height of 50 km because of the
presence of Ozone layer.
● Clouds are almost absent and there is very little dust or watervapour.
(3) Mesosphere It extends upto a height of 80 km.
● Temperature decreases with height again and reaches upto –100°C at the
height of 80 km.
●  Bulk of the meteors are destroyed in this region. It is also called
‘Chemosphere’.



● In upper part of the Mesosphere (60-80 km) oxygen exists in its atomic
form.
(4) Thermosphere It is located between 80 to 400 kms.
●  In its lower part, there is an electrically charged layer called the
Ionosphere.
● Radio waves transmitted from the earth are reflected back to the earth by
this layer.
● Temperature again starts increasing with height because of radiation from
the Sun.
● The aurora borealis and aurora australis sometimes occur in the upper part
of thermosphere and lower part of the exosphere, where they overlap into the
thermosphere.
●  Thermosphere is a region of the atmosphere that is ionized by solar
radiation. It is responsible for auroras.
● During daytime hours, it stretches from 50 to 1000 km and includes the
mesosphere, thermosphere and part of the xosphere.
● Ionization in the mesosphere largely ceases during the night, so auroras are
normally seen only in the thermosphere and lower exosphere.
● The ionosphere forms the inner edge of the magnetosphere.
(5) Exosphere It is the uppermost layer of the atmosphere extending beyond
the Thermosphere above a height of 400 kms.
● Here the atmospheric gases are very thin.
Atmospheric Pressure
● Atmospheric Pressure is the weight of the column of air at any given place
and time. It is measured by means of an instrument called a Barometer. It is
measured as a force per unit area. The units used by meteorologists for this
purpose are called Millibars (mb).
● The distribution of atmospheric pressure is shown on a map by Isobars.
●  An Isobar is an imaginary line drawn through places having equal
atmospheric pressure reduced to sea level.
WIND
●  Horizontal movement of the air is called as wind. Due to horizontal
difference in air pressure, air flows from areas of high pressure to areas of
low pressure.
● The vertical or nearly vertical movement of air is referred to as air current.



● Winds and air currents together comprise a system of circulation in the
atmosphere.
Types of Wind
(1) Planetary winds : These winds blow throughout the year from one
latitude to the other in response to the latitudinal differences in air pressure,
for example, the trade winds and the westerly winds.
● Trade Winds : The winds which blow from the sub-tropical high pressure
towards the equatorial region of low pressure regularly throughout the year
in many areas especially the oceans and the hot deserts from north-east in the
northern hemisphere. It brings little rain except on the line of convergence of
the two trade wind systems.
●  Westerlies : The Westerly winds are those which blow with great
frequency from the Horse Latitudes towards the polar region throughout the
year with varying intensity and cause rain near the polar regions.
Westerlies are stronger in the Southern Hemisphere because of the vast
expanse of ocean water. Owing to their ferocious nature, they are also
described as “Roaring Forties”. “Furious Fifties” and “Shrieking Sixties”
which were dreaded terms for navigation.
● Doldrums : Also known as inter-tropical convergence Zone (ITCZ). It is
the equatorial belt of low atmospheric pressure where the north-east and
south east Trade winds converge, it is a region of calmness. The calmness
periodically broken by storms, accompanied by heavy rains.
●  Horse Latitude : They are the sub-tropical belts of high atmospheric
pressure over the oceans (near 30° latitude) between the regions of Trade
winds and Westerlies. They are regions of calm, light variable winds and dry
air. They are also known as calm of Cancer and calms of Capricorn.
Coriolis Force : The phenomena of deflection of all winds to the right, anti-
clockwise in the northern hemisphere, while they deflects to the left,
clockwise in the Southern hemisphere with respect to the rotating Earth is
called Coriolis Force. The Coriolis force is zero at the equator and maximum
at the poles as it depends on the sine of latitude. With the increasing wind
velocity, coriolis force also increases.
(2) Periodic winds : The Winds changing their direction periodically with
change in season are called periodic winds. Monsoons are the best examples
of large scale modification of the planetary wind system.
●  Monsoon : The word monsoon has been derived from the Arabic word
“Mausam” which means season. The monsoon winds thus refers to the wind



systems that have a pronounced seasonal reversal of direction.
● The monsoon winds blow over India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Myanmar, Sri
Lanka, Arabian Sea, Bay of Bengal, South-Eastern Asia, Northern Australia,
China and Japan.
(3) Local Winds : Local winds develop as a result of local differences in
temperature and pressure.
They affect small areas and are restricted to the lowest levels of the
troposphere.
● Loo : A very hot and dry wind (hot wave) in the North Western India and
Pakistan which blows from the west in afternoon of May and June and may
cause sunstroke.
●  Mistral : The cold wind which originates over the snow-covered
mountains of Alps and blows towards the Mediterranean Sea.
● Chinook and Foehn : Warm and dry local winds blowing on the leeward
sides of the mountains are called Chinook in the USA and Foehn in
Switzerland.
●  Tornado : An extremely violent whirl-wind, covering a small area,
sometimes wind velocity exceeds 300 km per hour. It occurs frequently in
the Mississippi basin of the U.S.A. and Sahara.
● Harmattan : The warm and dry winds blowing from north-east and east to
west in the eastern parts of Sahara Desert are called “Harmattan”. Similar
winds are called ‘brickfielder’ in Australia, ‘blackroller’ in USA, ‘Shamal’
in Mesopotamia and Persian Gulf and ‘Norwester’ in New Zealand.
●  Sirrocco : It is a warm, dry and dusty wind which blows in northerly
direction from Sahara desert and after crossing Mediterranean Sea reaches
Italy, Spain etc. Similar winds are known as ‘Khamsin in Egypt, ‘Gibli’ in
Libya, ‘Chilli’ in Tunisia,
Cyclone
● A cyclone is an area of closed, circular fluid motion rotating in the same
direction as the Earth.
●  This is usually characterised by inward spiraling winds that rotate
anticlockwise in the Northern Hemisphere and clockwise in Southern
Hemisphere of the Earth.
● A cyclone is a low pressure area.
● A cyclone's center is the area of lowest atmospheric pressure in the region.
● An extratropical cyclone is a synoptic scale low pressure weather system
that does not have tropical characteristics, being connected with fronts and



horizontal gradient in temperature and dew point.
● A sub-tropical cyclone is a weather system that has some characteristics of
a tropical cyclone and some characteristics of extratropical cyclone.
● They can form between equator and tropics.
● A tropical cyclone is a storm system characterized by a low pressure centre
and numerous of them produce flooding due to heavy rain and strong wind.
● A topical cyclone feeds on heat released when moist air rises, resulting in
condensation of water vapour contained in the moist air.
●  An Anticyclone is a weather phenomenon as a large scale circulation of
winds around a central region of high atmospheric pressure.
●  Clockwise in the Northern Hemisphere and anti clockwise in Southern
Hemisphere.
Weather Front
● A weather front is a boundary separating two masses of air of different
densities and is the principal cause of meteorological phenomenon.
●  The air masses separated by a front usually differ in temperature and
humidity.
● Types of Front : There are four types of Fronts —
1. Cold Fronts
2. Warm Fronts
3. Occluded Fronts
4. Stationary Fronts
1. Cold Fronts : A cold front is located at the leading edge of the
temperature drop off which in an isotherm analysis shows up as the leading
edge of the isotherm gradient and it normally lies within a sharp surface
trough.
● Cold fronts often bring heavy thunder forms rain and hail.
● Cold fronts can produce sharper changes in weather and move up to twice
as quickly as warm fronts since cold air is denser than warm air.
2. Warm Fronts : Warm fronts are the leading edge of a homogeneous warm
air mass, which is located on the equatorward edge of the gradient in
isotherms.
● These fronts lie within broader trough of low pressure than cold fronts.
●  A warm front moves slowly than the cold front which usually follows
because cold air is denser and lander to remove from the earth's surface.



●  Clouds ahead of the warm front are mostly stratiform and rain form
gradually increases as the front approaches.
● Fog can also occur preceding a warm frontal passage.
3. Occluded Front : The overtaking of a warm front by a cold front in an
atmospheric depression.
Which ultimately lifts the warm sector off the surface of the Earth, is called
an Occluded front. This front shows the characteristics of both cold and
warm front.
4. Stationary Front : This front is formed when two contrasting air masses
converge in such a way that they become parallel to each other and there is
no ascent of air.
Humidity
● Humidity is the general term which describes the invisible amount of water
vapour present in the air.
● Absolute Humidity is the weight of actual amount of water vapour present
in a unit volume of air.
It is expressed as grams per cubic meter of air.
● Specific Humidity is the weight of water vapour per unit weight of air. It is
expressed as grams per kilogram of air.
● Relative Humidity is the ratio of the air’s actual water vapour content to its
water vapour capacity at a given temperature. It is expressed in percentage.
● Dew point is the temperature at which saturation occurs.
Evaporation and Condensation
● Evaporation is the process by which water is transformed from liquid to
gaseous form. It takes approximately 600 calories of energy to convert one
gram of water to water vapour.
● One calorie is the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of one
gram of water to 1°C.
● Condensation is the process of change of state from gaseous to liquid or
solid state.
● Dew, white frost, fog, mist and clouds are various forms of condensation.
●  When the moisture is deposited in the form of water droplets on cooler
surface of solid objects such as stones, grass backs and plant leaves, it is
known as dew.
● The ideal conditions for dew formation are : a clear sky, little or no wind,
high relative humidity and cold and long nights.



●  When condensation takes place at a dew point which is at or below
freezing point, excess moisture is deposited in the form of minute ice
crystals. It is called as white frost.
● Fog is defined as a cloud with its base at or very near the ground. Fogs are
of different kinds depending upon the nature of the cooling process.
● Mist is also a kind of fog in which the visibility is more than one km but
less then 2 km.
● Cloud is a mass of minute droplets of water or tiny crystals of ice formed
by the condensation of the water-vapour in free air at considerable
elevations.
Three main categories of clouds :
1. Cirrus clouds - Forms around 12 km altitude.
2. Altostratus clouds – forms around 6 km altitude.
3. Stratocumulus clouds – forms at low altitude around 2.1 km.
Precipitation
● Condensation of water vapour in the air in the form of water droplets and
ice and their falling on the ground is called precipitation.
● The precipitation in the form of drops of water is called rainfall.
●  When the temperature is less than O°C precipitation takes place in the
form of fine flakes of snow and is called snow-fall.
● Sleet is frozen raindrops and refrozen snow water.
● Precipitation in the form of hard rounded pellets is known as hail.
● On the basis of its origin precipitation may be classified into three main
types :
(i) Convectional Precipitation :
It is caused when moist winds are drawn into the convection currents of a hot
region. It generally occurs in equatorial region. The thundery rain of a
summer afternoon is a typical example.
(ii) Orographic Precipitation :
It is caused by the surface relief of the land, mainly, by the presence of
mountain range. There is heavy rain on the wind-ward side.
(iii) Cyclonic Precipitation : It is associated with the passage of a cyclone or
depression.
Forest in the World
● According to a recent global assement forests cover 31% of the total land
area of the World.
● The average land area per capita is 0.6 hectare.



● The total forest areas in 2016 was around 4 billion hectares.
Major Forest types
(1) Tropical Hardwood Forestc :
These are found in the regions of high temperature and high rainfall.
Forests are divided into two types.
(a) Equatorial Forest : These forests extend between 5° North and 5° South
of the equator. They are found in Zaire basin of Africa, the Amazon basin of
South America and with some modifications in Malaysia and Indonesia.
● The equatorial forests in the Amazon basin are also known as Selvas.
●  These forests are very dense due to high temperature and rainfall
throughout the year.
● They present a layered structure.
Numerous creepers like liana climb the trees. Due to high humidity
throughout the year epiphytes growing on trees could be seen commonly.
● These are evergreen forests.
● Most of the trees in these forests have hard wood.
● Mohogany, Rosewood, Ebony etc.
are the hard wood trees.
(b) Monsoon Forests :
● These forest are found in central and north-east India, Myanmar, Vietnam,
Thailand, Laos, Cambodia and northeast Australia.
●  Monsoon forests are not very dense. Sal, teak and Sisam are important
trees of the region.
● Besides, in the areas of high rainfall bamboos, rubber, cinchona, mahogany
etc. are found.
(2) Temperate Deciduous Hardwood Forests
● Temperate regions of moderate temperature and rainfall like central and
western Europe, northeastern USA, Southern Russia, Central America,
eastern Asia.
Korea, Japan, China etc. have the hardwood deciduous forests.
●  Trees of these forests shed their leaves at the onset of the winter and
remain without leaves throughout the winter.
● They are found between 30° to 50° North and South of the equator.
● Wood of these trees are lighter and easier to work on. Important trees of
this forests are Oak, Birch, Chestnut, Maple, Walnut and Elm.
(3) Temperate Coniferous Softwood Forests or Taiga



● Except for a few hill-slopes, most of the coniferous forests are confined to
the northern latitudes.
● These are located between 50° N and 70° N latitude.
● In the southern hemisphere, the extent of these forests is limited.
●  They are found in an extensive belt in the northern hemisphere running
through Canada, Norway, Swedan, Finland, Latavia, Lithuania, Estonia and
Central and Eastern Siberia.
● In Siberia they are known as Taiga forests. They are found on the mountain
slopes, between altitudes of 1500 and 2000 meters.
● Coniferous trees are tall, straight with narrow, needle like leaves.
Most of these are evergreen but some trees like larch are deciduous.
●  These forests are commercially valuable as one species of tree is found
over extensive areas.
● Pine, Cedar, Spruce, Fir, Red wood and Walsum are some of the important
trees of these forests.
DRAINAGE
● The Drainage refers to a body of flowing water, ranging in scale from a rill
to river.
● The evolution of drainage system in a particular region is determined by
the nature of the original surface and the Geological structures.
● There are broadly two categories of drainage – Sequent Drainage System
and Insequent Drainage System.
Consequent Stream : In the region of flooded structure, stream formed in
the synclinical troughs is called synclinical consequent stream.
Consequent stream follows the direction of the slope. Most of the stream
draining the coastal plains of India are of this type.
Antecedent Drainage : The stream which originated before the upliftment
of the surface on which they flow. For example, Indus, Sutlej and
Brahmaputra are antecedent rivers as they originated before the upliftment of
Himalayan Range and hence create deep Gorge, along the Mountain Range.
Superimposed Drainage : It is formed when the nature and characteristics
of the valley and flow direction of a consequent stream develop on the upper
geological formulation and structure are superimposed on the lower
geological formation of the entirely different characteristics.
For example, river Subarnarekha is superimposed on Dalma hills on the west
of Chandil in the Chhotanagpur plateau region of Jharkhand.



HYDROSPHERE
●  Hydrosphere is the water surface which includes the oceans, lakes and
rivers. It is estimated that the hydrosphere contains about 1,460,000 cubic km
of water.
● Of this 97.3% is in the oceans and inland seas. The rest 2.7% is found as
glaciers and ice caps, fresh water lakes, rivers and underground water.
WATER ON THE EARTH’S SURFACE

Oceans 1,370 97.25%
Ice Caps and Glaciers 29 2.05%
Ground Water 9.5 0.68%
Oceans and Seas
● The oceans comprise more than 70.1% of the earth’s surface.
● They exert a great influence upon the global and regional climates.
● They help to modify the distribution of temperature along the coastal areas.
● They help to sustain the hydrological cycle.
● Oceans are the repositiories of a large number of useful metallic and non-
metallic minerals such as petroleum, gas, common salt, gold, diamond etc.
●  The sea, as a biological environment is, the easiest available and an
inexhaustible source of food and other products of value to man.
● Of all the marine resources, fish is the most abundant and important.
DISSOLVED ELEMENTS IN SEA/OCEAN WATER

Elements/Salt gm of salt/ Kg water
Chlorine 18.97
Sodium 10.47
Sulphate 2.65
Magnesium 1.28
Calcium 0.41
Potassium 0.38
Bicarbonate 0.14
Bromine 0.06
Borate 0.02



 
● Continental Shelf : It is the seaward extension of the continent from the
shoreline to the continental edge.
● The continental shelves provide the richest fishing ground in the world e.g.
the Grand Banks off Newfound land, the North sea and the Sunda shelf.
● The shelves are also potential mining sites for minerals.
● A significant proportion of the world production of petroleum and natural
gas comes from them.
● The average width of shelves is about 70 km and the mean slope is less 1.
Continental slope It lies at the edge of the continental shelf, generally up to
the depth of 2000 fathoms (3660 mt.) from the mean sea level. It has a steep
slope with the angle of slope varying from 2° to 5°.
Continental Rise
● The place where the continental slopes end, the gentle sloping continental
rise begins.
● The average slope is between 0.5° and 1° & its general relief is low.
● With increasing depth the Continental Rise becomes virtually flat and it
merges with abyssal plain.
Abyssal Plains
● Beyond the Continental Rise it is found at the depth of 3000 to 6000 mt.
● They cover about 40% of the total ocean floor and generally are bounded
by hills on the seaward side.
●  They are covered by sediments both of terrigenus and shallow water
origins. The irregular topography of the abyssal plain are burried forming
relatively flat areas due to large supply of sediments.
Submarine Ridges
● These are the mountain ranges in the ocean.
● A large number of submarine ridges are placed centrally in the oceans.
● At some places their summits may rise above the sea level forming islands.
Abyssal Hills
● A deep sea floor also contains numerous isolated abyssal hills, sea-mounts
and guyots.
● A submarine mountain peak rising more than 1000 mt. above ocean floor
are known as “seamount”.
● Flat topped seamounts are known as “Guyots”.



● Coral Reefs : In tropical seas many kinds of coral animals and marine
organisms such as coral polyps, calcareous algae, shellforming creatures and
lime-secreting plants live in large colonies.
● ‘Great Barrier Reef’ (off Queensland, Australia) is the largest reef in the
world.
●  Though they are very tiny creatures, their ability to secrete calcium
carbonate within their tiny cells has given rise to peculiar type of marine land
form.
● As a rule they thrive well only in the warmer tropical seas.
●  Coral Bleaching : The loss of algae from the corals resulting into the
white colour which indicates the death of corals is considered as coral
Bleaching.
●  The coral bleaching during 1997 -98, has been recorded as the most
catastrophic event.
● Global warming has been reported as the major factor of coral bleaching.
SALINITY
●  Salinity is expressed as the number of grams of dissolved salts in 1000
grams of sea water.
● The average salinity of oceans is about 35 per thousand or 35%°.
● The amount of salinity determines the composition and movements of the
sea water and the distribution of various marine lives.
● Salinity varies both horizontally and vertically.
● The average salinity of N-Hemisphere is 34%o while for S-Hemisphere it
is 35%o.
● The greatest proportion of salt is found in two areas which lie about the
Tropic of Cancer and the Tropic of Capricorn. From these regions the salinity
decrease both towards equator and the poles.
● In general there is low salinity in equatorial zone, high in tropical belt, low
in temperate zone and minimum in sub-polar zone.
Worlds Highest Saline bodies

Lake/Sea Salinity (%O)
Van Lake 330
Dead Sea 238
Great Salt lake 220



Sambhar Lake 205
Red Sea 40

OCEAN MOVEMENTS
● Ocean currents are swift moving, large masses of surface water that move
in a fairly defined direction.
● Ocean currents are of two typesthe warm currents and the cold currents.
●  In the Northern Hemisphere, the current move to their right and in
Southern Hemisphre to their left.
● In Northern Indian Ocean the currents change their direction in response to
the reversal of the monsoon winds.
●  The periodic phenomenon of alternate rise and fall in the sea levels is
known as Tide.
●  Tides are produced due to gravitational interaction of Earth, Moon and
Sun.
●  Moon exerts the strongest influence on tides because of its closeness to
Earth.
● On the full moon and the new moon tides are the highest (Spring Tides).
● On the Ist and 3rd quarters, tides are lower than the usual (Neap tides).
● Waves are oscillatory movements in water mainly produced by winds.
● Tsunamis
IMPACT OF CURRENTS
● Warm and Cold currents maintain the temperature of the place as per its
temperature.
● Because of warm current, ports are open in Polar region.
● Winds that are in contact with the warm current are full of humidity and
thus rainfall occurs in coastal areas.
● Due to cold current, deserts develop.
● A dense fog is created where two different currents meet.
● Warm current melts the iceberg.
MISCELLANEOUS INFORMATION
ZONES OF JURISDICTION EEZ
(i) Territorial waters : over which a state has full sovereignty.
They are recognised as extending for 12 nautical miles from the coastline.



(ii) Contiguous Zone or pursuit zone : extends for further 12 nautical miles
in which the coastal state can take action against those who break the law
within the true territorial waters.
(iii) Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) : extends for 200 nautical miles,
starting from the same base line as the territorial waters. Within the EEZ, the
coastal state has the right to exploit all economic resources.
(iv) High Seas lie beyond all these zones, and are free to navigation by
vessels of all nations.
OCEAN CURRENTS

Ocean Currents Nature
Pacific Kuroshio Warm

 Oyashio Cold

 Okhotsk Cold

 Alaskan Warm

 California Cold

 East Australian Peruvian/ Warm

 Humboldt Cold

Atlantic Antilles Warm

 Florida North Atlantic Warm

 Drift Warm

 Gulf Stream Warm

 Labrador Cold

 Canaries Cold

 Brazil Warm

 Falkland Cold



 Benguela Cold

 Guinea Warm

Indian Mozambique Warm

 Agulhas Warm

 West Australian Cold

STRAITS OF THE WORLD
Bab-al- Mandeb — Red sea of Arabian Sea

Bering — Arctic Ocean and Bering Sea
Bosphorus — Black Sea and Marmara Sea
Dover — North sea and Atlantic Ocean
Florida — Gulf of Mexico and Atlantic Ocean
Gibralter — Mediterranean Sea and Atlantic Ocean
Malacca — Java Sea and Bay of Bengal
Palk — Bay of Bengal and Indian Ocean
Magellan — South Pacific Sea and South Atlantic Ocean
Sunda — Java sea and Indian Ocean
Yucatan — Gulf of Mexico and Caribbean Sea.
Hudson — Canada and Bafin Island
Denmark — Greenland and Iceland
Bass — Tasmania and Australia
Luzon — Philippines and Taiwan
Mozambique — Mozambique and Madagascar
Cook — North Island and Southern Alps of Newzeland
Bonifacio — Ajaccio and Sardinia (Italy)
English Channel — Bay of Biscay and North Sea



Makassar — Borneo and Celebes
Malacca — Singapore and Sumatra
Molucca — Minhassa and Halmahera Islands
Transportation: Major Railways of the World
● Trans-Siberian Railways : Trans- Siberian railways are the longest and
the most important railway line of the world.
● Its length is approximately 9232 km.
● This railway is extended from Leningrad, Moscow to Vladivostok.
●  This railway joins Western Part of Russian Federation with the Eastern
Part of Russian Federation.
● The Construction of Trans- Siberian railways was started in 1891 and was
completed in 1905 for traffic.
Trans-Australian Railway :
Trans-Australian railways move along the eastern coasts of Australia in a
North-South direction in Australia.
● This railways starts from Chairs in the North and reaches Canberra in the
south.
● This railway route passes through Sydney Broken hills, Port Augusta and
Kalgoorli centres.
Canals
Suez Canal : This is the world’s biggest canal constructed in the Senai
peninsula of Egypt. This is the most important waterway. This canal is
constructed by cutting the Isthmus of Suez.
● This canal joins Red sea with Mediterranean sea.
● The Northern bank of Suez canal is known as ‘Port Said’ of Mediterranean
sea and Southern bank of Red sea is known as Port Suez. Due to construction
of this canal, the distance between Europe and Asia has decreased.
Panama Canal : This canal is between Pacific ocean and Carribean ocean.
● Gatun lake is situated near this canal.
● This canal is constructed in Panama, a country of central America.
● This canal joins Atlantic Ocean with Pacific Ocean.
● The length of Panama is about 80 km.
RIVER SYSTEMS OF THE WORLD
River Source Destination Country

River Source Destination Country



Amur Lake Khanka Sea of Okhotsk China, Mongolia, Russia
Brahmaputra Tibet Bay of Bengal China, India,

Bangladesh
Ganga Himalayas Bay of Bengal India, Bangladesh
Huang Ho Kunlun MT. Gulf of Bohai China
Indus Mt. Kailash Arabian Sea India, China, Pakistan
Irrawaddy Mali River Andaman Sea Myanmar
Lena Lake Baikal Laptev Sea Russia
Mekong Lasagongma South China China, Thialand, Laos,

Sea Vietnam, Cambodia,
Myanmar

Irtysh Altai Mountain Ob River China, Russia
Salween Tibet Andaman Sea China, Myanmar,

Thailand
Tigris Turkey Shatt-at-Arab Iraq, Turkey, Syria.
Ural Ural Mountain Caspian Sea Russia, Kazakhstan
Volga Valdai Hills Caspian Sea Russia
Yenisey Stanovoy Range Arctic Ocean Russia, Mongolia
Danube Black Forest Black Sea Germany, Austria,

Mountain Hungary, Slovakia,
Croatia, Serbia,
Romania, Bulgaria,
Maldova

Dnieper Valdai Hills Black Sea Belarus, Russia, Ukraine
Rhine Black Forest North Sea Switzerland, France,

Mountains Germany, Netherlands
Zaire Lake Mweru Atlantic Ocean Dem. Rep. Congo,

Gabon
Zambezi Mwinilunga Indian Ocean Dem. Rep. Congo,

Malawi, Zambia,



Angola, Mozambique
Niger Guinea High Gulf of Guinea Nigeria, Mali, Niger,

lands Guinea, Benin
Nile Lake Victoria Mediterranean Dem. Rep. Congo,

Sea Egypt, Tanzania,
Uganda, Sudan, South
Sudan

Amazon Andes Mountains Atlantic Ocean Equador, Peru, Brazil
Mississippi Lake Itaska Gulf of Mexico Canada, USA
Mackenzie Great slave lake Beaufort sea Canada
Orinoco Parima Mountain Atlantic Colombia, Venezuela

Ocean
Parana Parnaiba River Rio dela Plata Brazil

Rio Grande
Paraguay Mato Grasso Parana River Paraguay, Brazil,

Argentia, Bolivia
Murray Australian Alps Southern Australia

Ocean
 
IMPORTANT ISOPLETHS

Type Line (representing) Connects points of Equal.
Isobath equal depth
Isobar equal atmospheric pressure
Isobathy Therm depth of water with equal temperature
Isocheim equal mean winter temperature
Isodose equal intensity of radiation
Isohel equal amounts of sunshine
Isohyet equal precipitation
Isoplat equal acidity in precipitation



Isostere equal atmospheric density
Isothere equal mean summer temperature
Isodrosotherm equal dew point
Isogonal equal magnetic declination
Isohaline equal salinity
Isohume equal humidity
Isoneph equal amaunt of cloud cover
Isophene biological events occurs at the same time.
Isotach equal wind speed.
Isotherm equal temperature
Isogloss Separating linguistic features.
 
PRINCIPAL MOUNTAIN PEAKS

Name Country Range
Mt. Everest Nepal-Tibet Himalayas
K2 (Godwin Austin) India Karakoram
Kanchenjunga Nepal-India Himalayas
Lhotse Nepal-China Himalayas
Makalu Tibet-Nepal Himalayas
Dhaulagiri Nepal Himalayas
Nanga Parvat India Himalayas
Nanda Devi India Himalayas
McKinley (Denali) Alaska (U.S.A.) Rockies
Mt Logan Canada Rockies
Mt Whitney USA Rockies
Mt Elbruz Russia Caucasus
Mont Blanc France Alps



Toubkal Morocco Atlas
Mt Kosciusko Australia Australian Alps

POLITICAL BOUNDARIES
R. Rio Grande : Mexico & USA
R. Amur : China & Russia
R. Limpopo : S Africa & Botswana and S Africa & Zimbabwe R. Zambezi :
Zambia & Zimbabwe
R. Orange : S. Africa & Namibia
R. Mekong : Cambodia & Thailand, Myanmar & Laos, Thailand & Loas
R. Salween : Myanmar & Thailand
R. Danube : Romania & Bulgaria, Yugoslavia
R. Uruguay : Uruguay & Brazil
R. Parana : Paraguay & Argentina, Brazil
R. Oder : Germany & Poland
Durand Line : Afghanistan & Pakistan
Hindenberg Line: Germany & Poland (After 1st World War) MacMohan
Line: India & China
Maginot Line : France & Germany
Oder Niesse Line: Poland & Germany (Presently)
Radcliffe Line : India & Pakistan
38th Parallel : North & South Korea
49th Parallel : USA & Canada
16th Parallel : Namibia & Angola
17th Parallel : North & South Vietnam (Before unification)
PRINCIPAL WATERFALLS

Name Location
Angel Venezuela
Tugela South Africa
Yosemite California
Ostra Mardolafoss Norway
Cuqenam Venezuela
Sutherland New Zealand



Ribbon California
Grey Kamarang Guyana
Northern Mardals Norway

LOCAL WINDS
Burster Warm Egypt

Khamsin
Harmattan Warm Guinea Coast
Mistral Cold S E France
Puna Cold Andes
Pampero Cold S. America
Simoon Warm Arabian Peninsula
Haboob Warm Sudan
Norwester Warm New Zealand
Bora Cold North Italy
Blizzard Cold Canada/USA
Sirocco Warm Sahara to Mediterranean Sea

PRINCIPAL LAKES OF THE WORLD
Name Length (sq. km.) Country

1. Caspian Sea (Largest) 3,71,800 Russia-Iran
2. Superior 82,350 USA-Canada
3. Victoria 69,500 Kenya-Uganda
4. Aral 64,500 Russia
5. Hudson 59,600 USA-Canada
6. Michigan 58,000 USA
7. Tanganyika 32,900 Tanzania-Zambia
8. Baikal 30,500 Russia
9. Erie 25,700 USA-Canada



10. Winnipeg 24,500 Canada
11. Malawi 23,310 Malawi Mozambique
12. Ontario 19,500 USA-Canada
13. Chad 16,300 Nigeria-Chad
14. Eyre (Salt) 9,580 Australia
15. Rudolf 9,065 Kenya
16. Titica 8,300 Peru-Bolivia
17. Athabasca 8,100 Canada
18. Nicaragua 8,000 Nicaragua
19. Reindeer 6,389 Canada
20. Kuko 5,957 China
21. Torrens 5,775 Australia
22. Victoria Nyanza 26,640 East Africa
23. Nyasa 30,044 Africa

OCEANS
Ocean Water area (%) Deepest point Depth (m)

Pacific 46 Mariana Trench 11,034
Atlantic 23 Puerto Rico Trench 9,200
Indian 20 Java Trench 7,450
Southern 7 South Sandwich 7,236
Ocean  Trench  
Arctic 4 Eurasian Basin 5,122

COUNTRY AND ITS SHARING BOUNDARY WITH SEA
Country Sea Country Sea

Yemen Red sea Saudi Arabia Red sea
Algeria Mediterranean sea Tunisia Mediterranean sea



Libya Mediterranean sea   
Ukraine Black sea Romania Black sea
Bulgaria Black sea Turkey Black sea
Turkmenistan Caspian sea Kazakhstan Caspian sea
Azerbaijan Caspian sea Iran Caspian sea
Russia Black sea Egypt Red sea
Sudan Red sea Eritrea Red sea

GRASS LANDS
Temperate Grassland Tropical Grassland

Prairie USA Savanna Africa
Steppe Russia Lanos Venzuela
Pampas Argentina Campos Brazil
Downs Australia Selvas Amazon Basin
Veld South Africa Kagon Philippines
Cantebury New Zealand   
Taiga Polar region   
COUNTRIES WITH THE LONGEST COAST LINE

1. Canada 2. Indonesia (Asia) 3. Russia 4. Philippines (Asia)
5. Japan 9. New 6. Australia 10. 7. Norwey 8. USA
Zealand China (Asia)

SHIFTING-CULTIVATION
Country Name Country Name

Mexico Milpa Laos Ray
Congo/Zaire Masole Sumatra Djuma
Ghana Proka Malaysia Ladang



India Jhum Thailand Tamrai
Myanmar Taungya Philippines Caingin
Sri Lanka Chena Brazil Roca
Indonesia Humah Madagascar Tavy
Venenzuela Conuco   
LIST OF LANGUAGES BY NUMBER OF NATIVE SPEAKERS

Rank Language % of World population
1. Mandarin (Chinees) 14.1 %
2. Spanish 5.85%
3. English 5.52%
4. Hindi 4.46 %
5. Arabic 4.23%
6. Portuguese 3.08 %
7. Bengali 3.05%
8. Russian 2.42%

MAJOR TRIBES OF THE WORLD
Acta Philippine Dayak Borneo

Kafir S. Africa Beja Sudan
Fellah Egypt Kurd Iran, Iraq
Bora South East Fullani Nigeria

 Colombia Han Nigeria

Yugeer North East Asia Buryats Central Aisa
Inuit N. America Yuit : Siberia
Aborigines Australia Afikpo Nigeria
Ainu : Japan Alacaluf Chile
Andmanese India Arapesh Papua New Guinea



Arunta Australia Ashants Ghana
 
###GEOGRAPHY (INDIA)###
Location
India is the seventh largest and the second most populous country in the
world. It lies between latitudes 8°4' N and 37°6' N and longitudes 68°7' E and
97°25' E.
● Country is divided into almost equal parts by the Tropic of Cancer.
● Tropic of Cancer Passes through 8 states — (From West to East) Gujarat
— Rajasthan — Madhya Pradesh — Chattisgarh — Jharkhand — West
Bengal — Tripura — Mizoram.
● Southernmost point of Mainland — Cape Comorin (Kanya Kumari),
●  Southernmost point of Indian Territory — Indira Point (6°45') Andman
and Nicobar
● Coastline of mainland India — 6100 km.
● India stretches from North to South — 3214 km.
● India stretches from East to West — 2933 km.
● Total length of mainland — 15,200 km.
● Total length of coastline — 7516.6 km
● Total boundary — 22716.6 km
● No. of Island in Bay of Bengal — 204
● No. of Island in Arabian Sea — 43

LAST POINT OF INDIAN BOUNDRY
1. Eastern Point — Kibithu (Arunanchal Pradesh)
2. Western Point — Gour Meta (Gujrat)
3. Northern Point — Indira Col (Jammu and Kashmir)
4. Southern Point — Indira Point
5. Southern most point of mainland — Kanyakumari (Cape Comorin,

Tamil Nadu)

THE INDIAN STATES ON INTERNATIONAL BOUNDRIES
1. Bangladesh 4096.7 km. West Bengal > Tripura > Meghalaya >

Mizoram > Assam



2 . China 3488 km. Jammu and Kashmir > Arunachal
Pradesh> Himachal Pradesh >
Uttarakhand > Sikkim

3. Pakistan 3323 km. Jammu and Kashmir > Rajasthan >
Gujarat > Punjab

4. Nepal 1751 km. Uttar Pradesh > Bihar > Uttarakhand >
West Bengal > Sikkim

5. Myanmar 1643 km. Arunachal > Mizoram > Nagaland >
Manipur

6. Bhutan 699 km. Assam > West Bengal > Arunachal >
Sikkim

7. Afghanistan 106 km. Jammu and Kashmir (POK)
There are seventeen states on International boundries.
VIZ : North-East States = 07
Sikkim = 01
West Bengal = 01
Total = 17
STATES OF COASTLINE (DESCENDING ORDER)
1. Andman and Nicobar Island 2. Gujarat 3. Andhra Pradesh 4. Tamil Nadu
5. Maharashtra 6. Kerala 7. Odisha 8. Karnataka 9. West Bengal 10. Goa
●  There are 5 countries in Indian subcontinent —1. India 2. Pakistan 3.
Bangladesh 4. Nepal 5. Bhutan
●  Puducherry is streches in three states of India —1. Mahe (Kerala) 2.
Karikal (Tamilnadu) 3. Puducherry (Tamilnadu) 4. Yanam (Andhra Pradesh)
● Four North-East States don't share their boundaries with Bangladesh— 1.
Nagaland 2. Manipur 3. Arunachal Pradesh 4. Sikkim
● Mac Mohan line divides India and China in Arunachal Pradesh.
● Indian state sharing its boundary with Nepal, Bhutan and China in Sikkim.
● Andaman and Nicobar is known as Emerald Island.
●  There are seventeen states share its boundaries with neighbouring
countries.



●  Uttar Pradesh borders maximum number of states (8) Uttarakhand,
Himanchal Pradesh, Haryana, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Jharkhand and Bihar.
●  82°30' E longitude is considered as the standard Meridian which passes
through Mirzapur in Uttar Pradesh.
●  The Indian standard Time (IST) is 5 hours 30 minutes ahead of the
Greenwhich Time (GMT).
●  Indian Standard Meridian passes through UP, MP, Chhattisgarh, Odisha
and Andhra Pradesh.
MAIN CHANNELS
1. Great Channel Indira Point and Indonesia
2. 8° Channel Maldiv and Minicoy
3. 9° Channel Minicoy and Lakshadweep
4. 10° Channel Little Andman and Car Nicobar
5. Palk Strait Gulf of Mannar and Bay of Bengal.
MAJOR PHYSIOGRAPHIC REGIONS
1. The Himalayan Mountain Chain
2. The Northern Plains — (a) Great Planes, (b) Thar Desert
3. The Great Peninsula Plateau — (a) Central Highland, (b) Peninsula
Plateau (c) Coastal Plains
The Himalayan Mountain Chain
Trans Himalayan :
● Trans Himalayans are the part of Eurasian Plate. It is also known as Tethis
Himalayans. Pamir Knot is known as “the roof of the world”. From here,
Kunlun run into Tibet.
● Karakoram enters into Kashmir. Karakoram pass is situated in Karakoram
range.
● Baltoro and Siachin are the glaciers of this range.
● Trans himalayas separate itself from great himalayas with Shuture zone.
● K2 (Godwin Austen) is the highest peak of Trans Himalaya (Karakoram
Range) with range of 8611 meters.
Greater Himalayas It is called as Himadri.
● Mount Everest is the highest peak of the world.
● Mount Everest is located in Nepal. It is called Sagarmatha in Nepal. It’s
height is 8848 meter.



● Tibetians call it Chamlungma.
●  Kangchenjunga is the second highest peak of greater himalayas.
Kangchenjunga lies in Sikkim.
●  Namchabarva is an important peak in east overlooking the Bhramaputra
where this range takes a sudden change and twist towards south to enter
India. Namchabarva lies in Tibet (China).
●  Several Passes are lie in this range like Bara Pass, Lapcha, Shipkila,
Thangla, Nifila, Nathula.
●  Hindustan-Tibet way which joins shimla to Gangtok, passes through
‘Shipkila Pass’ in Satluj Valley.
● Great Himalayas separate from middle Himalays with main central thrust.
●  The great himalayan mountain range boasts of the tallest heads of the
world.
● Most of the peaks remain under perpetual snow.
● In Greater Himalayas, the snow line is at lower elevation of the southern
slopes than on the northern slopes because the southern slopes are steeper
and received more rainfall.
Middle Himalayas (Lesser Himalayas or the Himachal)
● Lie to the south of Great Himalayas.
● Mountains and valleys are disposed in all direction.
● Its important ranges are ; Dhauladhar, Pirpanjal, Niaga-Tibba, Mussoorie.
● Important hill stations are : Dharmshala, Dalhousie, Shimla, Mussoorrie,
Nainital, Darjelling, Chakrata, Almora, Chhail, Ranikhet.
Shivaliks :
● Southern most ranges of Himalayas are called Shivalik.
● Shivaliks are made of unconsolidated deposits of rivers.
● Shivaliks are prone to earthquakes and land slides.
● This is the outer Himalayas.
● This is called the sub Himalayan.
● Shivalik is known as Jammu Hills in Jammu and Dafla, Mishimi, Abor, in
Arunachal Pradesh. It is the newest range.
IMPORTANT PEAKS OF INDIA
Highest peak of Himalayas in India : Kangchenjunga Highest mountain peak
in India : K2 or Godwin Austen Highest peak of Aravalis : Gurushikhar
Highest peak of Western Ghats : Anaimudi Highest peak of Nilgiri :
Dodabeta Highest peak of Eastern Ghats : Mahendragiri Highest peak of



Rajmahal hills : Parasnath Highest peak of Andaman & Nicobar : Saddle
peak
THE NORTH INDIAN PLAINS
● The Great North Indian plain lies to the north of the peninsula and to the
south of the Himalayas.
● The plain extends for 3200 km between the mouths of the Ganga and the
Indus, all along the foot of the moutains, with a width varying from 150 to
300 km.
● The plain is narrowest in Assam with its width varying between 90 and
100 km. It is 160 km wide near the Rajmahal hills and 280 km near
Allahabad.
●  The plains were formed as a result of the filling of depression lying
between the peninsula and the Himalayas by the depositional work of the
Himalayan and peninsular rivers.
●  Generally the plain is recognised as consisting of four divisions each
characterised by important differences in surface relief. These divisions are :
(i) Bhabar (ii) Terai (iii) Bhangar and ( iv ) Khadar.
● The Bhabar is a narrow belt of 8-16 km wide running east-west direction
along foothills of Shiwaliks. The Himalyan rivers deposits their sediments
creating alluvial fans along the foot hills. The fans consisting of gravel and
unsorted sediments merge together to form the Bhabar belt.
● The Bhabar zone is studded with pebbles and it consists of porous beds.
The porosity is so high that all streams lose themselves in Bhabar.
● The Terai is marshy tract south of the Bhabar marked by reemergence of
underground streams of the Bhabar belt. These streams convert large areas
along the rivers into marshy lands of excessive dampness.
● The Bhangar refers to the upland formed by deposition of older alluvium
in river beds. It is alluvial terrace above the flood plains, often impregnated
with calcareous concentration known as Kankar.
● The Khadar is composed of newer alluvium and forms the flood plains
along the river banks. It is a lowland formed by deposition of detritus of new
alluvium in the river beds during floods every year.
● The Great Indian Plains of North India can be divided into the following
four major regions.
(i) The Rajasthan or Western Plains (ii) The Punjab-Haryana Plains (iii) The
Ganga Plains (iv) The Brahmaputra Plains



● The Rajasthan Plain : The plain consisting of Thar or Marusthali,& the
arid plain of Rajasthan. Luni is the only river flowing through this desert
region. North of the Luni basin, there is a large area of inland drainage.
Eastern Thar Desert has several saline lakes such as Sambhar, Didwana,
Degana, Sargol, Khatu etc. Sambhar is the largest salt lake in India.
● The Punjab Haryana plain : This part of the plain is formed as a result of
deposits brought by five rivers ( Satluj, Ravi, Chenab, Jhelum & Beas) and
known as Punjab. It is primarily made up of Doabs (interfluves ) - the land
between two rivers.
● The important Doabs in this plain are :-1. Bist -Jalandhar Doab between
Beas and Satluj.
2. Bari Doab between the Beas and Ravi.
3. Rechna Doab between the Ravi and the Chenab.
4. Chaj Doab between Chenab and the Jhelum.
5. Sindsagar Doab between the Jhelum, Chenab and the Indus.
● Ganga plain : The plain stretches between Punjab- Haryana plain to the
Sundarbans Delta region. The Ganga along with Yamuna, Gomti, Ghaghara,
Gandak and Kosi has deposited large quantities of alluvium to build this
fertile and densely populated region.
● The important doabs in this plain are :
(i) Ganga-Yamuna Doab (ii) Ganga-Ghaghra Doab
(iii) Ghaghra-Gandak (iv) Gandak-Kosi Doab (Mithila Plain)
● The Ganga plain is further divided into, Upper Ganga plain, Middle Ganga
plain, and the Lower Ganga plain.
●  The Brahmaputra plain : It is an aggradational plain built up by,
depositional work of Brahmaputra and its tributaries. It is girdled by
Purvanchal hills, Patkai Bum, Naga hills in the east, Garo-Khasi-Jaintia,
Mikir hills and Meghalaya plateau in the south. Several islands have
Originated because of the deposition of soil in the middle of the
Brahmaputra.
‘Majuli’ is such island which is in Assam. It is the largest riverine island in
the world.

THE PENINSULAR PLATEAU It is a part of Gondvana land. Triangular
in shape. Archaean in age. It is the oldest plateau not only in India but also in
the World. Average height is 600-900 m.



● Its slopes towards north and east side and in southern part from west to
east. It is divided into two parts : (i) Central lands, (ii) Deccan plateau.
Peninsular Plateau

Central Upland Deccan Plateau
1. Aravalli range 1. Satpura range
2. Upland of Eastern Rajasthan 2. Maharashtra Plateau
3. Malwa Plateau 3. Mahanadi Basin
4. Bundelkhand Plateau 4. Dandkaranya
5. Vindhyachal and Baghelkhand 5. Telangana Plateau
Plateau
6. Chhotanagpur Plateau 6. Tamilnadu Plateau
7. Meghalaya plateau 7. Western Ghats

8. Eastern Ghats

ARAVALLI REGION It is a fold mountain. It is a residual mountain range.
It is older than Himalayas. Broader in South as compared to north.
●  Elevation goes on decreasing from south to north. Gurushikhar is the
highest peak of Aravalli. Gurushikhar is near Mount Abu in Rajasthan.
● Extends from Delhi Ridge to Ahmedabad. Aravalli acts as Gangetic water
divide. Nakki lake is located at Mt. Abu. It is very famous for tourists.
THE MALWA PLATEAU
● Lies between Aravallis and Vindhyan ranges. It is very affected by gully
erosion.
● Rolling Plains are found on this plateau.
● Gwalior hills are lying to the north of this plateau.
●  Chambal and its tributeries have turned the north of this plateau into
ravines.
BUNDELKHAND- BAGHELKHAND-VINDHYACHAL
●  The north-east side of Malwa Plateau is known as Bundelkhand and
Baghelkhand.
● Chambal and Yamuna rivers have made a bad land in Bundelkhand.
● Dhuandhar water falls is in Jabalpur.



MEGHALAYA PLATEAU It is an outlier of the Peninsular Plateau.
● Important ranges and peaks:
1. Dafla, Miri Abor and Mishmi — Eastern Himalayas
2. Patkai, Naga, Mizo, Barail, Rengma, Mikir — East side
3. Garo, Khasi, Jaintia — Meghalaya Plateau.
● Lakes — Loktak in Manipur with floating island.
● Mynsynram receives highest rainfall.
● Parks — Namdapha, Keibul Lamjao, Dampa, Norkrek.
SATPURA RANGE
● Satpuras are fold mountains.
● Mahadeo hills forms the highest portion.
● Dhupgarh is the highest peak of Satpura. It is near Panchmarhi in Madhya
Pradesh.
WESTERN GHATS
●  Form a continuous barrier from north to south almost parallel to the
Arabian sea.
● Extended in 1600 km. long.
● General altitude is 900 – 1200 m. and width 50-80 km. It is standing as a
wall. One can across through the pass. It is vertical to the south-west
monsoon. It is the source of many big rivers. It is known as Sahyadri in
Maharashtra and Karnataka, Nilgiri in Tamilnadu.
● Nilgiri is the meeting point of Western Ghats and Eastern Ghats.
● Hills of Western Ghats from North to South — Kalsubai — Harishchandra
— Mahabaleshwar — Bababudan — Nilgiris — Annamalai— Palani —
Cardamom.
● Doda Beta (2637) is the highest peak of Nilgiris.
● Udagamandalam (Ooty) is a hill station located in Nilgiris in Tamil Nadu.
● Anai Mudi is the highest peak of Western Ghats.
● Anai Mudi is located in Annamalai hills. It is falls in Kerala.
● Famous hill station Kodaikanal lies in Palani hills in Tamil Nadu.
● Pariyar lake is situated in Palani hills.
●  Western Ghats is divided into two parts named — North Sahyadri and
South Sahyadri.
● Western Ghats act as a water divide.
EASTERN GHATS



● Eastern Ghats form a discontinuous line of hills Parallel to east coast.
● General altitude is 600 m.
● Width is 190km in north and 75 km is south.
●  Its width decreases from north to south because Peninsular Plateau is
triangle is shape.
●  Mahendragiri is the highest peak is in Odisha. It is known by different
names at different places —
1. Northern circars north of Godavari
2. Palkonda and Nallamala between Godavari and Palar river.
3. Shevaroy and Javadi as Tamil Nadu hills.
●  Hills from north to south — Nallamala — Erralmala — Velikonda —
Palkonda — Javadi — Shevaroy.
WEST COAST PLAINS
● Extend from Gujarat to Kerala.
● Known by different names at different states —
1. Konkan in Gujarat and Goa
2. Kanara in Karnataka.
3. Malabar in Kerala.
● Plains are wider in south and narrower in the north.
● Garsopa falls (Jog falls) on Karnataka coast are highest in India.
● In Kerala, Coast has salt water lakes called lagoons.
● Ashtamudi and Vembanad are important lakes located here.
EAST COAST PLAINS
●  Coastal strip along with Bay of Bengal is broader as compared to the
Western coast.
● Known as Utkal plains in Odisha.
● Chilka lagoon is located in Odisha.
● Kolleru lake lies in Andhra Pradesh.
● Pulicat lake is located here.
● Coromandal Coast is in Tamil Nadu in south.
● Rivers of this coastal plains are longer and less erosine.
● Rivers form deltas
● Ports are lesser than that of Eastern Coast Plains.
LAKSHADWEEP ISLAND
● Extend from 8°N — 12° N.



● Consists of 30 small islands, only 10 of which are populated.
● Population consists of moppilis from Kerala.
● Some islands are called Attol because of horseshoe shaped.
●  Minicoy islands lie to the extreme south, it is the largest island of
Lakhadeewp.
ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR ISLAND
● Extend from 6°39' N to 13°34' N.
● Consist of two groups — Andman Group and Nicobar Group
●  They are submerged part of Arakanyoma (Myanmar). It is a mountain
range.
● 10° channel separates Andman from Nicobar.
● Little Andman is separate from Great Andman by Duncan passage.
● Great Nicobar is the largest island in the group.
● Saddle peak is the highest peak of Andaman and Nicobar island located in
North Andaman.
● The barren Island which is India’s only active volcano is situated in the
east of Middle Andaman.
● Tribes : Onges, Senthelese, Jarawas, Shompens.
CLIMATE
●  The climate of India can be broadly describe as Tropical Monsoon
Climate.
●  Derived from the Arabic word ‘Mausam’ monsoon implies a seasonal
reversal in the wind direction through the year.
● The monsoon regime emphasises the unity of India with the rest of south-
east Asia region.
● The meteorologists usually recognise the following four seasons:-(i) Hot
weather season, (ii) Cold weather season, (iii) South-West Monsoon season,
and (iv) The Season of retreating Monsoon.
● Summer is India’s hottest season. Summer season starts in March with day
times temperatures exceeding 30° C. Coastal India as well as the southern
states of Tamil Nadu and Kerala experience high humidity. By May, most of
interior India experience very high temperature (40° C).
● Warm land surface creates large area of low pressure over north western
India. This creates an onshore wind bringing the moisture laden maritime air
from Indian Ocean to the land.



● Southwest Monsoons: The southwest monsoons supplies over 80 per cent
of India’s annual rainfall. It consists of two arms, the Bay of Bengal arm, and
the Arabian Sea arm. Both arms are attracted to the low pressure area over
the Thar desert in Rajasthan.
● The Bay of Bengal branch moves in the northwest direction whereas the
Arabian Sea arm moves in the northeast direction.
●  During this season, cyclones occur, causing widespread devastation to
coastal regions. Cherapunji and Mawsynram in Meghalaya, the world's
wettest place, receive rainfall above 300 cms annually.
●  The monsoons start, withdrawing by the last week of August. By mid
September, it has withdrawn from Mumbai and by October, the southwest
monsoons have completely withdrawn from India.
●  Northeast Monsoons: After the withdrawal of the monsoons, the
northeast monsoons begin by November. Supplying 20 per cent of India’s
rainfall it doesn’t cover the entire country but only the States of Tamil Nadu,
West Bengal, Arunachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala and Meghalaya.
● Cold mountain air travelling along the Brahmaputra river brings rain to the
northeast region of India.
This picks up moisture over the Bay of Bengal resulting in heavy rain in
southern India.
FACTORS RESPONSIBLE FOR INDIAN MONSOON
1. The differential heating and cooling of land water creates low pressure on
the landmass of India while the seas around experience comparatively high
pressure.
2. The shift of the position of Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) in
summer, over the Ganga plain.
3. The presence of the high-pressure area, east of Madagascar, approximately
at 20°S over the Indian ocean.
4. The Tibetan plateau gets intensely heated during summer, which result in
strong vertical air currents and the formation of low pressure over the plateau
at about 9 km above sea level.
5. The movement of the westerly jet stream to the north of the Himalayas and
the presence of the tropical easterly jet stream over the Indian peninsula
during summer.
DRAINAGE



● India has been adorned, with hundreds of large and small rivers, by the
nature.
●  The threefold physiographic division has an important bearing on the
drainage of Indian Subcontinent.
● On the basis of their origin the river system of India can be classified into
two categories:-(i) The Himalayan rivers (ii) The Peninsular rivers.
The Himalayan River System It is constituted by the Indus, the Ganga, the
Brahmaputra and their tributaries.
● These rivers originate from the lofty Himalayan ranges and are named as
the Himalayan rivers.
● These rivers have large basins and catchment areas.
● The Himalayan rivers flow through deep I-shaped valleys called gorges.
These gorges have been carved out by down cutting carried on side by side
with the uplift of the Himalayas. These are examples of antecedent drainage.
●  The Himalayan rivers are perennial in nature, i.e., the water flows
throughout the year in these rivers.
●  These rivers receive water both from the monsoons and snowmelt. The
perennial nature of these rivers makes them useful for irrigation.
●  These rivers flow across the young fold mountains and are still in a
youthful stage.
● The upper reaches of the Himalayan rivers are highly tortuous. When they
enter the plains, there is a sudden reduction in the speed of flow of water.
Under these circumstances these rivers form meanders and often shift their
beds.
●  The Himalayan rivers form big deltas at their mouths. The Ganga-
Brahmaputra delta is the largest in the world.
The Peninsular River System
● The Peninsular rivers have shorter and shallower courses as compared to
their Himalayan Counterparts.
●  A large number of the Peninsular rivers are seasonal, as their flow is
dependent on rainfall.
● The Peninsular drainage system is older than the Himalayan one.
●  Most of the major rivers of the Peninsula such as the Mahanadi, the
Godavari, the Krishna and the Cauvery flow Eastwards and drain into the
Bay of Bengal.
● The Narmada and the Tapi are the only long rivers, which flow west and
make estuaries rather than making a delta because of their swift flow and



steep slopes.
● The drainage basins of the Peninsular rivers are comparatively smaller in
size.
●  Estuaries are partially enclosed bodies of water along coastlines where
fresh water and salt water meet and mix.
 



River System of India
 

Rivers of North India
River Source Length Drainage Important Tributaries

(in Area
km.) (sq.km.)

Burhi Western slope of 320 10.150 Joins the Ganga at
Gandak Sumesar Hills of Munger (Bihar)

elevation at 330m.
Beas Kulu hill (elevation 460 20.303  

3.960 and near
Rohtang Pass)

Chenab At an elevation of 1.800 26.755  
4.900 m at Lahul (in

India)
Damodar Rises in 541 22.000 Gartus. Konar. Jamunia

Chhotanagpur plateau and Barakar; once known
(near Balumatha in as the Sorrow of Bengal
Jharkhand) at an
elevation of 1.366 m.

Ghaghara near Mansarovar 1.080 1.27.950 Rapti. Sarda. It joins the
Lake Ganga near Chapra. In

Nepal it is known as
Kamali.

Ganga (i) Alaknanda at an 2.525 8.61.404 Yamuna. Ram Ganga.
elevation of 7.800 m. Gandak.
(ii) Bhagirathi at an Ghaghara. Kosi. Burhi
elevation of 6.600 m. Gandak.

Bagmati. Gomti. Son.
Mahananda. Kamla.
Damodar. Jalangi.
Bhairab. Matabhanga-
Gorai Confluence of
Yamuna at Allahabad



Gandak At an elevation of 425 9.540 (in In Nepal, it is known as
7.620 m. near Tibet. (in India) Narayani.

India) It joins the Ganga at
Patna. Total drainage :
45.800 sq. km.

Gomti About 3 km. east of 940 30.437 Sai. Barma. Saryu.
Pilibhit at 200m. Chuha. Gachai. Jomki
elevation.

Indus Mansarovar Lake 2.880 3.21.290 Zaskar. Astar. Dras.
of Shyok. Swat. Kurram.
which Shigar. Gilgit. Kabul.
1570 Jhelum. Chenab. Ravi.
km. in Beas and Satlui
India

Kosi From Tibet/Nepal 730 11.600 Kosi. Arun. Tamur. Total
(in drainage : 74.500 sq. km.
India) Notorious for floods and

hence known as 'Sorrow
of Bihar'

Ravi Kulu hill (Himachal 725 14.442  
Pradesh)

Ram Near Nainital. in the 696 32.412 joins the Ganga below
Ganga lower Himalaya at an Farukkhabad. Tributaries

elevation of 3.110 m. : Khoh. Gangan. Aril
Kosi. Deoha

Satluj At an elevation of 1.050 24.087 Beas joins at Harike
4.570 m near Dharma (in
Pass India)

Son Amarkantak 784  Joins Ganga at Maner
near Patna; Tributaries-
N. Koel & Punpun

Yamuna at an elevation of 1.300 3.59.000 Chambal. Betwa. Son.
6.330 m from a spring Hindu. Ken. Sarda
at Yamunotri.



The Brahmaputra River System
River Source Length Drainage Important Tributaries

(km) Area
(sq.km.)

Barak Manipur hills 902 25.900 Jiri. Chiri. Horong. Katakhel.
Longai

Buri  362 8.473 Namphunk. Namchik.
Dihang Manaton. Tirap
Dhansiri Laisang peak 354 12.250 Dihing. Diphu. Nambar.

(Nagaland) Kalyan
Jia Bhorelli Tibet 264 11.843 Bichom. Khari. Dikari. Sonai.

Tongsa. Kur
Jaldhaka Sikkim 186 3.958 Murk. Dihana
Koppili Mikir North 256 15.800 Jamuna. Borpani. Umum

Cachar hills
Manas Bhutan 376 37.500 Tonsa. Kur
Subansiri Tibet 442 32.640 Kamla
(known as
Lohit in
the lower
reaches)
Teesta Sikkim 109 12.540 Rajani. Great Ranjit. Lish.

Gish. Ghel
Torsa Chumbi 358 4.883 Holong. Kalgani

valley (Tibet)

Rivers of South India
River Source Length Drainage Important Tributaries

Area
Narmada Amarkantak 1.312 98.796 Burner. Baiyar. Sher. Dudhi.

plateau Madhya Shakkar. Tawa. Hiran.
Pradesh Tendoni. Barna. Kolar.



Anjal. Machak. Kundi. Goi.
Karyan

Tapi Near Multai 724 64.145 Purna. Betul. Levda. Vaghur.
(Betul district) Patki. Ganjal. Dhattrranj.

Bohad. Bori. Anbhora.
Khursi. Kapra. Sipra.
Panjhara. Garja. Khokri.
Utaoli. Bokar. Subi. Mor.
Mautri. Guli. Aner.
Arunavati. Gomal. Harki.
Valer. etc.

Luni Annasagar 482 37.250 Sukri
(Ajmer district)

Sabarmati Aravalli hills 300 21.674 Wakal. Jawai. Mittri. Sei.
Harnav. Halthmathi. Watrak.
Meshwa

Mahanadi Near Pharisa 806 1.41.600 Sheonath. Hadse. Mand. lb
village (Rajpur (left bank). Jonk. Ong. Tel

(right bank)
Brahmani Near Nagri 800 39.033 Kura. Sankhed. Tikra

village (Ranchi
District)

Godavari Trimbak in 1465 312.812 All the following rivers upto
Nasik Pranhita river. Pravara,

Purna, Manjra, Penganga,
Wainganga, Wardha,
Pranhita, Indravati,

Krishna At an altitude of 1.400 2.58.948 Ghatprabha, Malprabha,
1.360. north of Bhima, Tungbhadra, Musi,
Mahabaleshwar Muneru
Koyna

Kaveri Brahmaputra 800 87.900 Harangi, Kabini,
hills Suyamayathi, Bhavani,



MULTIPURPOSE PROJECTS
Project River States involved

1. Bhakra-Nangal Satluj River Joint Venture of Punjab.
Project Haiyana and Rajasthan.
2. Beas Project Beas River Punjab. Haryana and

Rajasthan
3. Beas-Sutlej Link Beas and Sutlej Rivers Himachal Pradesh and
Project Rajasthan
4. Chambal Project Chambal River (origin on Joint venture of Rajasthan

the northern slopes of the and Madhya Pradesh
Vindhyas near Mhow in
M.P.)

5. Damodar Valley Damodar River (rises in Jharkhand and West
Project the Kamarpet hill in the Bengal.

Chhotanagpur Plateau of
Jharkhand).

6. Gandak Project Gandak River Joint venture of U.P..
Bihar. Nepal; also receives
irrigation and power
facilities

7. Hasdeo Project Hasdeo River, a tributary Chhattisgarh
of Mahanadi

8. Hirakud Project Mahanadi River (rises Odisha
from Bastar Hills near
Sihawa and flows through
Chhattisgarh and Orissa).

9. Kosi Project Kosi River (rises from Bihar & Nepal
6000 m. high Tibet
Plateau).

10. Nagarjunasagar Krishna River Andhra Pradesh
Project
11. Rihand Dam Rihand River (It rises in Uttar Pradesh



the Manipat Hills in the
Sarguja district of M.P.)

12. Tungabhadra Tungabhadra River Joint venture of Andhra
Project Pradesh and Karnataka

River water disputes and States involved
Dispute States Involved

Krishna Water dispute Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Maharashtra
Mahadayi/Mandovi Water Goa, Karnataka and Maharashtra
dispute
Vansadhara Water dispute Andhra Pradesh and Odisha
Cauvery Water dispute Tamilnadu, Karnataka, Kerala and

Puducherry
Babhali Barrage issue Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra
Mulla Periyar Dam issue Tamilnadu and Kerala
Godavari water dispute Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya

Pradesh, Odisha, Karnataka
Narmada water dispute Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,

Gujarat

IMPORTANT PLACES ON RIVER BANKS
Place State River

Agra Uttar Pradesh Yamuna
Ahmedabad Gujarat Sabarmati
Allahabad Uttar Pradesh Confluence of Ganga

Yamuna & Saraswati
Alwaye Kerala Periyar
Ayodhya Uttar Pradesh Saryu
Badrinath Uttarakhand Alaknanda
Bhagalpur Bihar Ganga



Buxar Bihar Ganga
Kolkata West Bengal Hooghly
Cuttack Odisha Mahanadi
Delhi Delhi Yamuna
Dibrugarh Assam Brahmaputra
Ferozepur Punjab Satluj
Guwahati Assam Brahmaputra
Haridwar Uttarakhand Ganga
Haora West Bengal Hooghly
Hyderabad Andhra Pradesh, Telangana Musi
Jabalpur Madhya Pradesh Narmada
Kanpur Uttar Pradesh Ganga
Ludhiana Punjab Satluj
Mathura Uttar Pradesh Yamuna
Moradabad Uttar Pradesh Ramganga
Munger Bihar Ganga
Nasik Maharashtra Godavari
Patna Bihar Ganga
Srinagar Jammu & Kashmir Jhelum
Surat Gujarat Tapti

NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILDLIFE
MAJOR INDIAN FOREST TYPES
(1) Tropical Evergreen Forest
●  Region : Areas having 200-300 cm or more annual rainfall such as
windward side of Western Ghats, North-Eastern hills of India, Andaman and
Nicobar Islands.
● Important trees : Rosewood, Shisham, Ebony, Mahogany, etc.
(2) Tropical Monsoon Forests



● Region : Areas having annual rainfall between 100-200 cm ( in Orissa,
Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka).
●  Important trees : Sal, Teak, Sandalwood, Myrobalan, Bamboo,
Rosewood, Ebony, Shisham, etc.
(3) Tidal or Littoral Forests
● Region : Areas of West Bengal, Andaman and Nicobar, Orissa and Andhra
Pradesh having annual rainfall above 200cm. ( deltaic regions).
● Important trees : Sundari
(4) Montane Forests
● Region : Eastern and Western Himalayas and Nilgiri, regions of Jammu
and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Kerala and Tamil Nadu.
● Important trees : The type of trees depends on the height of mountain:
Sal ( lower Shiwalik range); Chir ( higher range); and Pine, Cedar, Fir,
Spruce,( 1,600-3,300m).
(5) Thorn Forests
●  Region: Areas of Rajashtan, Punjab and Gujarat having annual rainfall
between 25 to 80cm.
● Important trees : Khajuri, Khair, Kikar and Babul.



MINERALS
Mineral Ore Found in Features

Iron Magnetite—the Odisha (Sonai, India has the
best quality of iron Mayubhanj, world’s largest
ore and contains Keonjhar), reserves,
72% pure iron. Jharkhand and approximately one
Haematite-contains Bihar (Singhbhum fourth of world’s
60 to 70% pure Hazaribagh, known reserves;
iron. Limonite- Palamau, Shahbad), Jharkhand has the
contains 40 to 60% Chhattisgarh and largest reserves
pure iron. Siderite- Madhya Pradesh accounting for
contains many (Raipur, Durg, about 25% of the
impurities and has Bastar, Raigarh, total reserves of
just 40 to 50% pure Bilaspur, Jabalpur, iron ore in India.
iron. Balaghat), Andhra

Pradesh (Krishna,
Kurnool, Chittor,

Coal Anthracite Coal— Bihar-Jharkhand- “About one-fourth
(Black the best quality of Bengal belt of India’s coal
Gold) coal and contains (Raniganj, Jharia, reserves lie in the

80 to 95% carbon. Giridih, Bokaro, DamodarValley,
It is found only in Karanpur), Madhya across Bihar,
Jammu and Pradesh and Jharkhand, and
Kashmir in small Chhattisgarh belt West Bengal. India
quantity. (Singrauli, Korba, is the fourth largest
Bituminous coal— Raigarh, Sonhat, coal producing
The most widely Sohagpur. Umaria), country in the world
used coal and Odisha (Desgarh, according to 1992
contains 40 to 80% Talcher), coal production in
carbon. It is found Maharashtra the country.”
in Jharkhand, (Chand), Andhra
Orissa, West Pradesh (Singreni),
Bengal, Assam (Makum,
Chhattisgarh and Lakhimpur);
Madhya Pradesh.



Lignite– Also
known as brown
coal. It is a lower
grade coal and
contains about 40 to

Manganese India has the second Odisha (Keonjhar, Orissa is the leading
largest manganese Kalahandi, producer of
ore reserves in the Mayurbhaj, Talcher) manganese in the
world after Madhya Pradesh country. India ranks
Zimbabwe. India is (Balaghat, Seoni, third in world in
the fifth largest Chhindwara, manganese
producer in the Jabalpur), production.
world after Brazil, Maharashtra
Gabon, South (Nagpur, Bhandara,
Africa and Ratnagiri), Gujarat
Australia. (Panchmahal),

Karnataka
(Chitradurg,
Tumkur, Shimoga,
Chikmagalur,
Belgaum,

Mica The three major Bihar (Gaya), India has largest
types of mica found Jharkhand deposits of mica in
in India are – (Hazaribagh), world India alone
Muscovite, Rajasthan (Ajmer, contributes about
Phlogopite and Shahpur, Tonk, two-thirds of the
Biotite. Bhilwara, Jaipur), world’s production

Andhra Pradesh
(Nellore)

Bauxite (aluminium ore) Jharkhand Third largest
(Palamu), Gujarat producer in the
(Kaira), Madhya world
Pradesh (Katni,
Jabalpur, Balaghat,
Bilaspur, Bastar),
Tamil



Copper India contributes to Jharkhand Very meager
about 3.5 to 4% of (Singhbhum, reserves; almost all
the world’s total Hazaribagh), copper comes from
production of Rajasthan (Khetri, Singbhum and
copper. Alwar, Bhilwara, Hazaribagh in

Jhunjhunu, Sirohi), Jharkhand and
Andhra Pradesh Khetri in Rajasthan.
(Guntur, Khamman,
Agnigundala),
Karnataka
(Chitradurg,

Crude oil 51.08 crore tones Assam, Tripura,  
Manipur, West
Bengal, Ganga
Valley, Himachal
Pradesh, Kutch of
West Bengal coast,

Lignite 429 crore tones Tamil Nadu Maximum deposits
(Neyveli fields) of about 383 crore
Some deposits also tones, are found in
found in Gujarat, Tamil Nadu.
Punducherry,
Rajasthan (Palana
fields), Jammu and
Kashmir (Riasi
fields).

Gold India’s contribution Karnataka (Kolar Karnataka was the
to gold production gold fields, Hutti leading producer of
across the world is Mines), in small gold accounting for
less than one quantities in Andhra 99% of the total
percent (0.75%). Pradesh (Ramgiri production. The

gold fields and remaining
Anantpur). production came

from Jharkhand.
Magnesite 23.91 crore tones Tamil Nadu  



(Salem), Uttranchal
(Almora, Chamoli,
Pithoragarh),
Karnataka (Mysore,
Hassan)

 



Use of Resources for Electricity production in India.
SL. No. Resources (Fuel) Percentage

1. Thermal (total) 64.98 %

 (a) Coal 54.09%

 (b) Gas (Natural Gas) 10.20%

 (c) Oil 0.69%

2. Hydro-electricity (Renewable) 21.64%
3. Nuclear 2.75%
4. Renewable Energy Sources 10.63%
Note : Renewable Energy sources, includes, Solar energy, Wind energy, Tidal energy, Geothermal
energy, Small Hydro project, Biomass Gasifier, etc.
Sectorwise Consumption of Electricity (%) in India (2013-14)

SL. No. Sector Consumption (%)
1. Industrial 43.83%
2. Domestic 22.46 %
3. Agriculture 18.03%
4. Commercial 8.72%
5. Railways 1.72%
6. Others 5.23%
Atomic Power Stations in India

SL. Atomic power Place
No. Station

1. Tarapur Palghar district, Maharashtra
2. Rawatbhata Kota district, Rajasthan
3. Kalpakkam Kanchipuram district, Tamil Nadu.
4. Narora Bulandshahar district, U.P.
5. Kakrapara Surat District, Gujarat
6. Kaiga North Kanara district, Karnataka



7. Kudankulam Tirunelveli, Tamil Nadu

SOILS IN INDIA
SOME IMPORTANT SOIL TYPES
(1) Alluvial Soils
● These soils are generally confined to the river basins and coastal plains.
These soils are very fertile soils.
●  The alluvial soils are fine-grained both in the areas of new alluvium
(Khadar) as well as the old alluvium (Bangar).
●  They are generally rich in potash but poor in phosphorus, nitrogen and
humus.
● The soils of North India are the examples of alluvial soils.
●  These soils cover about 22% parts of the total geographical area of the
country.These are azonal soils.
(2) Black Soils
● The black soils are concentrated over the Deccan lava tract.
● These are also known as the ‘black cotton soils’ or ‘Regur’ soils. These
soils are famous for the cultivation of cotton.
● Chemically the black soils consist of lime, iron, magnesium and alumina.
● The black soil lack in phosphorus, nitrogen and organic matter. Black soil
is very retentive of moisture. It swells greatly and becomes sticky when wet
in rainy season.
● Some of the major crops grown on the black soils are cotton, wheat, jowar,
linseed, virginia tobacco, castor, sunflower and millets.
(3) Red Soils
● The reddish colour of the soil is due to the presence of iron in crystalline
and metamorphic rocks.
● Red soils are poorer in quality as compared to Alluvial soils.
● By and large, the red soils are poor in lime, magnesia, phosphates, nitrogen
and humus, but are fairly rich in potash.
(4) Laterite Soils
● The laterite soils are formed due to the alternations of wet and dry season
which leads to the leaching away of the siliceous matter of the rocks.
● The soils in the higher areas are generally more acidic than in low lying
areas.
● The main development of laterite soil has taken place in the higher areas of
the plateau.



Areawise classification of Indian soils into the following order as per the
USDA soil taxonomy.

SL. Soil Area in Precentate
No. (Thousand Hectares)

1. Inceptisols 130372.90 39.74%
2. Entisols 92131.71 28.08 %
3. Alfisols 44448.68 13.55%
4. Vertisols 27960.00 8.52%
5. Aridisols 14069.00 4.28%
6. Ultisols 8250.00 2.51%
7. Mollisols 1320.00 0.40%
8. Others 9503.10 2.92%
 
● The laterite soils are commonly found in Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu,
Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh.
● The laterite soils are poor in lime and magnesia and deficient in Nitrogen.
(5) Mountain or Forest soils
● These soils are rich in fossils but they are undecomposed so, humic acid is
formed and the soils became acidic.
● These soils contain thin layers because of their development on mountain
slopes.
● These soils poor in potash, phosphours and lime. They are less fertile.
● Plantations are done in these soils because of their being on the mountain
slopes. Plantations of tea, coffee, spices and fruits are done in these soils in
India.
● These soils are affected by the problem of erosion.
(6) Desert or Arid Soils
● These are infertile soils which are alkaline in nature.
● These are sandy soils in which iron and phosphorous are enough but there
is a deficiency of nitrogen and humus.
● Coarse cereals such as jowar, bajra, ragi etc and oilseeds are produced in
these soils.
(7) Saline and Alkaline Soils



●  The development of these soils has happened in those areas where dry
climate is found and there is lack of proper drainage.
● These soils are also called ‘reh’, ‘usar’ or ‘Kollar’.
● These soils are rich in sodium, calcium and magnesium.
● These soils are deficient in nitrogen and lime.
● Coconut trees are found in plenty in these soils.
(8) Peaty or Organic Soils
● These soils are dark, heavy and too much acidic.
● These soils are formed by deposition of too much organic matter in marshy
areas.
●  These soils are found mainly in Alleppey district of Kerala, Almora in
Uttarakhand, the Sunderbans delta and other lower deltaic regions.
AGRICULTURE IN INDIA
Crop Classification : Indian crops can be divided into following categories :
1. Food Crops : Rice, Wheat, Maize, Millets-Jowar, Bajra, Ragi, Pulses-
Gram, Tur (Arhar).
2. Cash Crops : Cotton, Jute, Sugarcane, Tobacco, Oilseeds, Groundnut,
Linseed, Sesame, Castorseed, Rapeseed, Mustard etc.
3. Plantation Crops : Tea, Coffee, Spices, Cardamom, Chillies, Ginger,
Turmeric, Coconut, Arecanut and Rubber.
4. Horticulture : Fruits-Apple, Peach, Pear, Aprecot, Almond, Strawberry,
Walnut, Mangao, Banana, Citrus Fruits and Vegetables.
CROPPING SEASON
1. Kharif Crops
● These are sown (in June or early July) with the commencement of south-
west monsoon and are harvested by the end of monsoon or autumn
(September/October).
●  The major kharif crops are rice, jowar, maize, cotton, groundnut, jute,
hemp, tobacco, bajra, sugarcane, pulses, forage grasses, green vegetables,
chillies, gourd, lady finger etc.
2. Rabi Crops
● These crops, grown in winter, require relatively cool climate during growth
and warm climate during germination of their seeds and maturation.
Therefore, sowing is done in November and crops are harvested in April-
May. Ex wheat, gram, and oilseeds like mustard and rape seed.
3. Zaid Crops



● Besides these two dominant crops, a brief cropping season has been lately
introduced in India mainly in irrigated areas where early-maturing crops,
called zaid crops, are grown between March and June. Ex urad, moong,
melons, water melons, cucumber, tuber vegetables etc.
LARGEST PRODUCERS OF MAJOR CROPS/AGRICULTURAL
PRODUCTS

Crops/Products State Crops/Products State
Rice West Bengal Soyabean Madhya

Pradesh
Wheat Uttar Pradesh Sunflower Karnataka
Maize Madhya Pradesh Tea Assam
Sugarcane Uttar Pradesh Coffee Karnataka
Cotton Maharashtra Rubber Kerala
Pulses Madhya Pradesh Pepper Kerala
Groundnut Gujarat Chillies Andhra Pradesh
Potato Uttar Pradesh Coconut Kerala
Onion Maharashtra   
LAKES OF INDIA

State/UT Lakes
Andhra Pradesh Kolleru Lake, Pulicat Lake
Arunachal Pradesh Sela Lake, Gango Lake
Assam Chandubi Lake, Deepor Beel, Son Beel
Bihar Kanwar Lake Bird Sanctuary
Chandigarh Sukhna Lake
Gujarat Hamirsar Lake, Kankaria, Nal Sarovar, Narayan

Sarovar, Sardar Sarovar, Thol lake, Vastrapur lake.
Haryana Badkhala Lake, Blue Bird Lake, Brahma Sarovar,

Damdama Lake, Karna Lake, Sannihit Sarovar,



Surajkund, Tilgar Lake.
Himachal Pradesh Maharana Pratap Sagar, Pandoh Lake, Gobind Sagar,

Renuka Lake, Macchial Lake, Khajjar Lake, Kumarwah
Lake, Prashar Lake, Dehnasar Lake, Nako Lake,
Chandra Tal, Suraj Tal, Dhankar Lake, Dashair, Bringhu
Lake, Manimahesh Lake, Ghadhasaru Lake, Mahakali
Lake, Lama Dal, Chander Naun, Kareri Lake, Rewalsar

Jammu and Anchar Lake, Dal Lake, Manasbal Lake, Mansar Lake,
Kashmir Pangong Tso Sheshnag Lake, Tso Moriri, Wular Lake
Karnataka Hebbal Lake, Ulsoor Lake, Bellandur Lake, Agara

Lake, Shanti Sagar, Karanji, Honnamana Kere, Pampa
Sarovar.

Kerala Ashtamudi Lake, Kuttanand Lake, Manaanchira,
Padinjarechira, Paravcirkayal, Punnamada Lake,
Shasthamkotta Lake, Vadakkechira, Vanchikulam,
Vellayani Lake.

Madhya Pradesh Bhojtal, Lower Lake, Upper Lake, Tawa Reservoir
Maharashtra Gorewada Lake, Khindsi Lake, Lonar Lake, Pashan,

Powai Lake, Rankala, Salim Ali Lake, Shivasagar Lake,
Tolao Poli, Upvan Lake, Venna Lake

Manipur Loktak Lake (Keibul Lamjao National Park) Umiam
Meghalaya Lake Palak dil, Tam dil
Mizoram Anshupa Lake, Chilka Lake, Kanjia Lake Bahour Lake
Odisha Harike Wetland, Kanjili Wetland, Ropar Wetland Ana
Puducherry Sagar, Balsamand Lake, Dhebar Lake, Jaisamand Lake,
Punjab Jal Mahal Lake, Kalyana Lake, Lake Foy Sagar,
Rajasthan Loonkaransar, Nakki Lake, Pachpadra Lake, Pushkar

Lake, Rajsamand Lake, Ramgarh Lake, Sambhar Lake,
Talwara Lake, Ummed Sagar.

Sikkim Gurudongmar Lake, Khecheopalri Lake, Lake Cholamu,
Lake Tsongmo

Tamil Nadu Berijam Lake, Chembaram bakkam Lake, Kaliveli
Lake, Kodaikanal Lake, Ooty lake, Perumal Eri, Red



Hills Lake, Sholavaram Lake, Singanallur Lake,
Veeranam Lake

Telangana Durgam cheruvu, Himayat Sagar, Hussain Sagar, Mir
Alam Tank, Osmar Sagar, Shamirpet Lake

Uttar Pradesh Barua Sagar Tal, Belasagar Lake, Amakhera Lake,
Keetham Lake, Ramgarh Tal Lake, Bhadital Lake,
Sheikha Lake, Nachan Tal

Uttarakhand Skeleton Lake, Sattal, Bhimatal, Nainital, Naukuchiatal,
Dodital

West Bengal Debar Lake, East Calcutta Wetlands, Jore Pokhri, Mirik
Lake, Rabindra Sarobar, Rasikbil, Santragacchi Lake,
Senchal Lake.

###HUMAN GEOGRAPHY###
●  The present day population of the Indian Sub-continent is supposed to
have affinity to the following racial groups :
1. The Negrito 2. The Proto-Australoids
3. The Mongoloids 4. The Mediterraneans
5. The Brachycephalic 6. The Nordics
TRIBES OF INDIA
Andaman Nicobar - Andamanese, Jarawas, Onges, Sentinelese, Shompens
Andhra Pradesh,  - Chenchu, Miri, Tangin, Mishmi, Apatamis, Khamti
Assam - Bodos, Karbi, Mikir, Abhor, Mishing, Rabhas, Tiwa/Lalung,
Dimasas, , Nagas
Gujarat - Kotwalia, Rabari
Himachal Pradesh - Gaddis
Jammu & Kashmir - Gujjar Great, Changpa
Jharkhand - Birhor, Ho, Munda, Oraon, Santhal
Kerala - Uralis, Kanis, Irula
Madhya Pradesh - Agaria, Kol, Muriyas, Baiga, Gond, Bhil
Maharashtra - Gaori, Warli
Manipur, Assam - Kuki
Meghalaya - Jaintia, Garo
Meghalaya, Assam - Khasi, Hmar
Mizoram - Pawi



Nagaland - Angami, Rengma, Zeliang
Nicobar - Nicobaries
Odisha - Khond
Rajashtan - Meena, Saharia
Sikkim - Bhutias, Limbu, Lepcha
Tamil Nadu - Toda, Kadar, Badaga, Paliyan, Kota
Tripura - Lushai
Uttar Pradesh - Khasa, Tharu, Bhotia

 



###ECONOMY###
ECONOMY AND ECONOMICS
● Economy is the state of a country or region in terms of the production and
consumption of goods and services and the supply of money.
●  Economics is the branch of knowledge concerned with the production,
consumption and transfer of wealth.
Various Types of Economy
● Capitalist Economy : An economic system based on private ownership of
capital and production inputs and on the production of goods and services for
profit.
Features of Capitalist Economy :
1. Private Property 2. Price Mechanism 3. Freedom of Enterprise 4.
Sovereignty of the consumers. 5. Profit motive 6. No government
interference 7. Democratic 8. Self Interests
● A Socialist Economy is characterised by social ownership and democratic
control of the means of production which may means autonomous
cooperatives or direct public ownership where its production is carried out
direct for use.
● A mixed economy is variously defined as an economic system consisting
of a mixture of either markets and economic planning, public ownership and
private ownership or free markets and economic interventionisms
● Indian economy is the example of this type of economy.
● Open Economy : It refers to a market economy which is generally free
from trade barriers and where exports and imports form a large percentage of
the GDP.
● Closed Economy : It is an economy in which no activity is conducted with
other economics.
The goal of economy is to provide consumers with everything that they need
from their own economy.
●  Economic Growth : An increase in the amount of goods and services
produced per head of the population over a period of time.
● Causes of economic Growth—
1. An increase in aggregate demand.
2. An increase in aggregate supply (productive capacity)



Sectors of Indian Economy—
●  Primary Sector : When the economic activity depends mainly on
exploitation of natural resources then that activity comes under the primary
sector. Ex-Agriculture and agriculture related activities.
● Secondary Sector : When the main activity involves manufacturing then it
is the secondary sector. All industrial production where physical goods are
produced come under the secondary sector.
● Tertiary Sector : When the activity involves providing intangible goods
like services then this is part of the tertiary sector.Ex - Financial services,
Banks, managements etc.
●  Organised Sector : The sector which carries out all activity through a
system and follows the law of the land is called organised sector.
● Unorganised Sector : The sector which evade most of the laws and don’t
follow the system comes under unorganised sector. Ex - tea stall, Grossery,
labour etc.
● Public Sector : Companies which are run and financed by the Government
comprises the public sector. Ex - BHEL, GAIL, SAIL, IOC etc.
● Private Sector : Companies which are run and financed by private people
comprises the private sector. Ex - Hero Honda, Tata, Maruti Suzuki etc.
General Principles of Economics
● Definition of Economics :
According to JB say : It is the science of production, distribution and
consumption of wealth.
According to Carl Menger : It is a science which studies human behaviour as
a relationship between ends and source means which have alternative usage.
Form of Economy :
1. Micro Economics 2. Macro Economics
(1) Micro Economics : It is the study of decisions of people and business
and the interaction of those decisions in markets.
●  The goal of microeconomics is to explain the prices and quantities of
individual goods and services. It also studies the effects of the Government
regulation and taxes on the prices and quantities of individual goods and
services.
(2) Macro Economics : It is the study of the national economy as well as
global economy and the way that a economic system work.



● The goal of macro economics is to explain general price level, national
income, employment, production. It also studies the effects of the
Government action-taxes, spending and the deficit on total incomes and price
level.
Monopoly : It is characterised by an absence of competition, which often
results in high prices and inferior goods. It is a market containing a single
firm.
Duopoly : A situation in which two companies own all or nearly all of the
market for a given product or services. It can have the same impact on the
market as a monopoly.
Oligopoly : It is a situation in which a particular market is controlled by a
small group of firms.
Perfect competition : It is the opposite of monopoly, in which only one firm
supplies a particular good or service, and the firm charge whatever it wants,
but under perfect competitions, there are many buyers and sellers, and prices
reflect supply and demand.
● Consumers have many substitutes.
● New firms can easily enter the market generating additional competition.
Monopolistic Competition : It is a market structure in which many firm sell
products that are similar but not identical.
● Characteristics—
(i) Many sellers (ii) Product differentiation (iii) Free ending.
Engel’s Law : The law which says that people generally spend a smaller part
of their budget on food as their income rises. The idea was suggested by
Ernst Engel, a Russian Statistician in 1857.
Laffer Curve : The Laffer curve is one possible representation of the
relationship between rates of taxation and the hypothetical resulting levels of
government revenue. Tax Revenue O 35% 70% Tax Rate
Okun’s Law : The relationship between an economy’s unemployment rate
and its gross national product (GNP)
● 20th century economist Arthur Okun developed this idea.
Greshm’s Law : When a government overvalues one type of money and
undervalues another, the undervalued money will leave the country or
disappear from circulation into hoards, while the overvalued money will
flood into circulations. It is commonly stated as ‘Bad Money drives out good
money.’



Phillip’s Curve : The inverse relationship between rate of inflation and rate
of unemployment is shown in the Phillip’s curve, pirce stability has a trade-
off against employment.
Some level of inflation could be considered desirable in order to minimize
unemployment.
Kuznets Curve : A kuznets curve graphs the hypothesis that as an economy
develops, market forces first increase and then decrease economic inequality.
Inequality
Income per capital
Giffen Good : When the price of an item increases, its demand should
decrease, but there can be a situation when even after Price rise, the demand
increases such goods are called Giffen goods. They violate the general law of
supply and demand. This concept was first identified by a statistician, Robert
Giffen that is why these called Giffen goods.
Inflation : Inflation is the rate at which the general level of Prices for goods
and services is rising and, consequently, the purchasing power of currency is
falling.
Types of Inflations
(1) Demand Pull Inflation : This types of inflation occurs when demand
exceeds supply.
(2) Cost - Push Inflation : This happens when there is an increase in the
cost of raw materials needed to produce the goods. Ex– Fuel costs. when the
cost of transport goods goes up, Firms have higher output costs.
This causes less goods being offered and results in higher prices for those
goods that are available.
Deflation : Deflation occurs when the general prices of goods and services
of an economy falls for a significant period of time. It is directly related to the
supply and demand of money. It occurs when the supply of money increases
slower than the supply of goods and services we purchase with it.
Stagflation : It is an economic cycle in which there is a high rate of both
inflation and unemployment.
It occurs when the production of goods and services in an economy slows
down or even starts to decline. It is a period of no growth or even an
economic contraction of an economy. It causes a high degree of
unemployment because we don’t need employees of we are not producing.



Depression : A depression is any economic downturn where real GDP
declines by more than 10% for a long period. In depression an extremely low
aggregate demand in the economy causes activities to decelerate.
Recession : It is a period of general economic decline and is typically
accompanied by a drop in the stock market, an increase in unemployment,
and a decline in the housing market.
In general a recession is less severe than a depression.
Factors of Recession
(1) High interest rate (2) Inflation (3) Reduced consumer confidence (4)
Reduced real wages.
Deflation : In economics, deflation is a decrease in the general level of
goods and services. It occurs when the inflation rate falls below 0%
Disinflation : It is a decrease in the rate of inflations, a slow down in the rate
of increase of the general price level of goods and services in a nation’s gross
domestic product over trip. It is the opposite of reflation.
Reflation : It is the act of stimulating the economy by increasing the money
supply or by reducing taxes, seaking to bring the economy (Specifically price
level) back up to the long-terms trend, following a dip in the business cycle.
Consumer Price Index (CPI) : A consumer price index measures changes
in the price level of a market basket of consumer goods and services
purchased by household. The annual percentage change in CPI is used as a
measure of inflation.
Wholesale Price Index (WPI) : A wholesale price Index is the price of a
representative basket of wholesale goods. The WPI focuses on the price of
goods traded between corporations, rather than goods brought by consumers,
which is measured by CPI.
Index of Industrial Production (IIP) : The Index of Industrial Production is
an index for India which details out the growth of various sectors in an
economy such as mining, electricity and manufacturing. The all India IIP is a
composite indicator that measures the short-term changes in the volume of
production of a basket of industrial products during a given period with
respect to that in a chosen base period.
Inflation and class and its effect

Classes Effects
Consumer Loss



Lender Loss
borrower Profit
Public Saving Loss
Public expenditure Increase
Import Increase
Export Decrease
Employment Increase
Production Profit
Trader Groups Profit
Farmers Profit
Pentioner Groups Loss
 
COMPARISON WPI CPI IIP

Question WPI CPI IIP
How Lespecyre's Formula Same Same
Who Economic Advisor CSO CSO
When Weekly & Monthly Monthly Monthly
Where They Ministeries, Dept. NSSO and Postal Minstries, Dept.
get data 3 :MFG > Primary Workers S 3 : MFC > Mining
Components Categories
Types Fuel Rural urban electricity Sector

Only one WPI wise and
Items 676 Combined goods usage wise

682
Base year 2004 2012 2004

SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INDEX
● Human Development Index (HDI) : The UN Human Development Index
is a standard means of measuring well-being, index was developed in 1990



by the Pakistani economist Mahbub-ul-Haq and has been used since 1993 by
the United Nations Development Programme in its annual report.
Indicators of HDI :
●  A long and healthy life, as measured by life expectancy at birth.
Knowledge, as measured by the adult literacy rate and the combined gross
enrolment ratio. A decent standard of living as measured by gross domestic
product (GDP) per capita at purchasing power parity (PPP) in US Dollars.
IHDI (Inequality -adjusted Human Development Index) :
●  IHDI adjusts the HDI for inequality in distribution of each dimension
across the population.
INDIA : A MIXED ECONOMY
● The Indian economy is a mixed economy.It has acquired this form with the
growth of a large public sector since Independence.
GDP : It is the official measure of the total output of goods and services in
the economy. It is the total market value of all final goods and services
produced during a given time period within a nation’s domestic border.
● The word ‘domestic’ in GDP means that we are only counting things that
are produced within our domestic border whether they are produced by
foreigners.
GDP = C + I + G + (X – M)
C = Consumption I = Investment G = Government Spending X = Export M =
Import
Gross National Product (GNP) :
GNP is the market value of all the products and services produced in a year
by the citizens of a country.
● This includes any income earned by residents from overseas investments
minus income earned within the domestic economy by overseas residents.
GNP = GDP + (X –M)
X = Earned income in foreigns by citizens
M = Earned income by foreigners in a country When X = M, GDP would be
equal to GNP, this type of economy will be closed economy.
Net Domestic Product (NDP) :
Net Domestic product equals the gross domestic product (GDP) minus
depreciation. Net Domestic product accounts for capital that has been
consumed over the year in the form of housing, vehicle, or machinery
deterioration.



NDP = GDP – depreciation
Net National Product (NNP)
When Charges for depreciation are deducted from the gross National product
(GNP), we get net national Product (NNP).
NNP = GNP – depreciation
National Income : It is also known as National Income at factor cost. NNP =
National IncomeFC
NI = NNP + Subsides-Indirect taxes
Disposable Income (DI) : The Income left after the payment of direct taxes
from Personal Income is called disposable income. DI = PI – Direct Taxes
Per capita Income : Per capita income of a country is derived by dividing
the national income of the country by the total populations of a country. PCI
= Total National Income Total National Population
National Income : Important Concepts
1. GNPMP = GDPMP + Income from Abroad
2. NNPMP = GNPMP – Depreciation
3. NDPMP = GDPMP – Depreciation
4. GDPMP = GNPMP – Income from Abroad
5. NNPMC = GNPFC – Depreciation
6. GNPFC = GNPMP – Indirect Taxes + Subsidy
7. GDPFC = GDPMP –Indirect Taxes + Subsidy
8. NNPFC = GNPMP –Depreciation– Indirect Taxes + Subsidy
9. NDPFC = GDPMP –Depreciation– Indirect Taxes + Subsidy MP =
Market Price FC = Factor Cost GNP = GNI (Gross National Income) NNP =
NNI (Net National Income)



● Public Account : This is an account in which public money is put in and
Government acts only as banker. It is operated by executive Action.
There is no need to take consent of parliament to withdraw money from this
account.
● Contigency Fund : This is the fund which is kept at disposal of president
to meet unforeseen expenditure. It is operated by secretary, ministry of
finance on behalf of the president.
● Public Receipts : Every receiving to a government by revenue and non
revenue sources is a receipt. It includes all income as well non incomed
accruals of government. It is divided into parts— (1) Revenue Receipts (2)
Capital Receipts.
●  Revenue Receipts : These receipts do not create any corresponding
liability for the government. These receipts don’t cause any reduction in
assets of the government.
Revenue receipts of a government are of two kinds :
(1) Tax revenue (2) Non-Tax revenue
(1) Tax Revenue : This includes all money earned by the government via
different taxes the government collects.
(2) Non-Tax Revenue : This includes all money earned by the government
from sources other than taxes. Ex– Fees, Fines, Escheat, Special Assessment,
Income from Public Enterprises, Grants.
● Capital Receipts : These receipts create a liability from the government.
These receipts cause reduction in assets of the government.
Capital receipts are classified as given below—
●  Recovery of Loans : These are capital receipts because they reduce
financial Liability of the government.



●  Borrowings : Funds raised by the government from the borrowing are
treated as capital receipts such receipts create liability.
● Other Receipts : Funds raised through disinvestment are included in this
category. By this government assets are reduced.
Comparison Chart
Basis for Capital Receipts Revenue Receipts

Basis for Capital Receipts Revenue Receipts
Comparison

1. Meaning Capital receipts are the Income Revenue receipts are the
generated from Investment and income generated from
financing activities of the the operating activities of
business the business

2. Term Long term Short term
3. Showing Balance Sheet Income Statement
4. Nature Non recurring Recurring
 
● Revenue Expenditure : An expenditure which do not creates assets or
reduces liability is called revenue Expenditure Ex– Salaries of government
employees, interest payment on loan taken by the government, pension,
subsidies, grants, etc.
● Capital Expenditure : It refers to the expenditure which leads to creations
of assets and reduction in liabilities. Ex– Constructions works, roads,
bridges, etc.
● Planned Expenditure : Any expenditure that is incurred on programmes
which are detailed under the current plan of the centre or centre’s advances to
state for their plan expenditure. Provisions of such expenditure in the budget
is called planned expenditure. Ex–Expenditure on electricity generations
irrigation and rural developments. Construction of roads, bridges, canals,
science & Tech, pollution control etc.
●  Non Planned Expenditure : This refers to the estimated expenditure
provided in the budget for spending during the year on routine functioning of
the government. It is all expenditure other than balanced expenditure of the
government. Ex–Expenditure on police, Judiciary, military etc.
INDIAN TAX STRUCTURE



Tax is a compulsory payment by the citizens to the government to meet the
public expenditure. Tax can be direct or indirect.

Direct Taxes : The taxes that charged upon and collected directly from the
person or organisation that ultimately pays the tax.
List of Direct Taxes :
(i) Corporate Tax : It is levied on the profit of the companies or corporations.
— It is the largest source of revenue of the Central Government.
(ii) Income Tax : It is the tax levied directly on the income of the people by
the Central Government.
(iii) Gift Tax : This tax is imposed by the Central Government on all
donation and gifts over and above the prescribed limits to the family
members.
(iv) Wealth Tax : This tax is lived on the net wealth of the individuals, Hindu
undivided family and joint stock companies. It is removed from Indian tax
system since April 2015.
Indirect Taxes : The tax which has incidence and impact at the different
points is the indirect tax.
As, for example, excise, sales tax, etc, which are imposed on either the
producers or the traders, but it is the general consumers who bear the burden
of tax.
List of Indirect Taxes :
(i) Custom Duties : These duties are imposed on commodities, which are to
be imported or exported from India.
(ii) Central Excise Duties : These duties are imposed by the Central
Government on the goods produced within the country except certain goods,
on which State Government are empowered to impose tax.
These goods include liquor drugs, etc.
(iii) Service Tax : It is a tax imposed on the person, who avails any specified
service.
— This tax was introduced in India in 1994-1995.



— With Economic growth and expansion of service sector in the economy,
revenue from service tax has been increasing over the years.
(iv) Value Added Tax (VAT) : VAT is a method of tax collection as well as
name of a state level tax in India.
— A tax collected at every stage of value addition, ie either by production or
distribution is known as value added tax.
— Value added refers to the difference between value of output and value of
intermediate consumption.
(v) Central Value Added Tax (CENVAT) : In the year 1996, the central
government started collecting its excise duty on the VAT method and the tax
was given a new name CENVAT.
Goods and Service Tax (GST) : The GST will simplify and harmonise the
indirect tax regime in the country — It will be imposed all over the country
with the uniformity of rate and will replace multiple central and state taxes.
— The GST will be levied both on goods and services.
— It would have a dual structure a central component levied and collected by
the centre and a state component administered by state.
Benefits of GST :
— GSt will simplify the indirect tax regime with a single tax.
— It will boost the GDP growth of country.
— GST will mobilise revenue systematically and reduce the fiscal deficit. —
Removal of cascading taxes makes the manufactring sector more competitive
and cut down the tax compliance burden.
Tax related terminology :
Tax Avoidance : It is the legal usage of tax regime to one’s own advantage,
to reduce the amount of tax that is payable by means that are within the law.
Tax Evasion : It is the illegal evasion of taxes by individuals, corporation
and trusts.
Tax Heavens : A tax heaven is a country or territory where certain taxes are
levied at a low rate or not at all individuals or corporate entities can find it
attractive to move themselves to areas with reduced or nil taxation levels.
Tax Buoyancy : It refers to the percentage change with the growth of
national income. That is growth based increase in tax collections.
Tax Elasticity : It is defined as the percentage change in tax revenue in
response to the change in tax rate and the extension of coverage. Buoyancy
on the other hand is the response to economic growth when the base
increases but there is no change in the rate.



Infrastructural facilities : Often referred to as economic and social
overheads, consist of :
(a) Energy : coal, electricity, oil and non-conventional sources.
(b) Transport : Railways, roads, shipping and civil aviation.
(c) Communications : Posts and telegraph, telephones, telecommunications,
etc.
(d) Banking, finance and insurance.
(e) Science and technology.
(f) Social overheads : health and hygiene and education.
LIST OF MAHARATNA, NAVRATNA AND MINIRATNA
Maharatnas :
Maharatna scheme was introduced for central public sector Enterprises
(CPSEs), with effect from May, 2010 in order to empower mega CPSEs to
expand their operations and emerge as global giants.
To be eligible for the grant of Maharatna status, the company should have an
average turnover of over Rs. 25,000 crore, average annual net worth of more
than Rs. 15,000 crore and average annual net profit over 5,000 crore during
the last three years. Besides, it should be a shareholding under the SEBI
regulations and have global presence.
Maharatna (Total no. of Maharatna is seven)
1. Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOC)
2. NTPC Limited
3. Oil & Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC)
4. Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL)
5. Coal India Limited (CIL)
6. Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL)
7. Gas Authority of India Limited (GAIL)
Navratnas :
Government introduced the Navaratna PSEs in 1997. Initially there was 9
Navaratna companies, many more central public sector Enterprises added in
Navratna list. Today there are 17 CPSEs in Navaratna companies list.
Medium Enterprises :
Manufacturing : Investment in plant Sector and machinery more than Rs. 5
crore, but does not exceed Rs. 10 crore.
Service Sector : Investment in equipments more than Rs. 2 crore, but does
not exceed Rs. 5 crore.



History of Planning in India
1934 Vishvesvaraya Plan in his book ‘The planned economy in India’ 1938
Nehru’s Congress Plan but not implemented.
1944 Bombay Plan by Industrialists such as JRD Tata, P. Thakurdas, GD
Birla, K. Lalbhai.
1944 The Gandhian Plan by Narayan Agarwal, given importance to
agriculture and cottage industries.
1945 M.N. Roy’s People’s Plan – with socialist learning.
1950 Jayprakash Narayan’s Sarvodya Plan based on Vinoba Bhave’s
Philosophy.
1952 NDC made by cabinet resolution.
2014 Modi shutdown Planning Commission.
2015 Government notified the formation of Niti Ayog.
NITI AYOG
● Niti Ayog or National Institution for Transforming India Ayog is a policy
think tank of government that replaces Planning Commission and it aims to
involve the states in economic policy making in india. It will be providing
strategic and technical advice to the central and the state governments.
● Prime Minister of India leads the Ayog and its chairperson.
● Government announced formation of Niti Ayog on 1st January, 2015.
● The Niti Ayog comprises of the following— (i) Prime Minister of India as
the Chairperson
(ii) Governing council comprising the chief ministers of all the states and
lieutenant-Governer of UTs.
(iii) Regional councils will be formed to address specific issues and
contingencies impacting more than one state or a regions. These will be
formed for a specified nature. The regional council will be convened by the
P.M. and will comprise of the CMs of states and Lt. Governers of UTs.
These will be chaired by the chairperson of the NITI Ayog or his nominee.
(iv) Vice-chairperson will be appointed by the PM. CEO – To be appointed
by the PM for a fix tenure.
FIVE YEAR PLANS

Plan Period Theme /Target
1st 1951-56 Harrod Domar Model. Main focus on agriculture,

irrigation, & power. Got more GDP than its target.



2nd 1956-61 P.C. Mahalanobis Model. Socialist Model, Rapid
industrialisation, heavy industries.

3rd 1961-66 Sukhmoy Chakraborty and sanddy. Also called
‘Gadgil Yojna'. Failed to achieve its target due to
droughts and war with Pakistan & China.

Holiday 1966-69 Holiday declared, 3 Annual plans followed.
4th 1969-74 Ashoka Rudra - Alon Manney. Growth with

stability.
5th 1974-79 C. Subramanyam and later DP Dhar Focus on

poverty removal.
Rolling Plan 1978-80 Morarji Desai's Janta Government with Rolling

Plan System
6th 1980-85 Poverty Removal IRDP, NREM, TRYSEM etc.
7th 1985-89 Focus on employment. Jawahar Rojgar Yojna

Started.
2 Annual 1989-91 Political instability at centre. Only annual plans.
Plans
8th 1992-97 Based on John W. Miller Model PV Narsimha's

LPG reforms
9th 1997-2002 Growth with Social Justice.
10th 2002-2007 8% GDP growth rate.
11th 2007-12 Theme Inclusive growth.

POVERTY AND THE PLANNING PROCESS IN INDIA
The Concept of Poverty
● Poverty can be defined as a social phenomenon in which section of the
society is unable to fulfil even its basic necessities of life.
Lakdawala Committee
● Committee formed in September 1989 for estimating total no. of poor by
Planning Commission under the chairmanship of D.T. Lakdawala.
Tendulkar Committee



● Planning Commission formed the committee under the chairmanship of
Tendulkar, report submitted in December 2009.
●  This committee gave importance to expenditure on health, education,
clothing in addition to food in its definition of poverty.
SR Hashim Committee
●  The planning commission has constituted an Expert group under the
chairmanship of SR Hashim on May 2010.
●  The panel has suggested that the government should use threestage
approach-automatic exclusion, automatic inclusion, and scoring index to
identify urban poor.
Rangarajan Report on Poverty
● Planning commission constituted committee under the chairmanship of Dr.
C. Rangarajan in June 2012, to review the methodology for measurement of
poverty in the country.
The percentage of people below the poverty line in 2011- 12 was 30.95% in
rural areas and 26.4% in urban areas.
TYPES OF POVERTY
1. Absolute Poverty :
● When the level of the income of people of a country is so low that they
cannot meet even their basic minimum requirements, it is called absolute
poverty.
2. Relative Poverty
●  When we compare the incomes of different people we find that some
people poor than others, it is called relative poverty.
Types of Unemployment
● Open unemployment : The labourers do not find a work to do.
Unskilled labour unemployment is included in this category of
unemployment.
● Structural Unemployment : This is related to economic structure of the
country. It is found when the demand for labour is unable to keep pace with
the supply, due to high growth rate of population and low rate of capital
formation. It is of long-term nature and India’s unemployment is mainly of
this type.
● Under employment : The person is engaged in work but his efficiency
and capability is not being utilised to the optimum level.



●  Disguised unemployment : If a person is engaged in a work but his
contribution of marginal productivity is zero then it is called disguised
unemployment.
This is mainly found in agriculture sector of developing economies.
Removing these disguised unemployed from work will not affect total
production.
● Seasonal unemployment : This arises because demand for labour changes
with seasons and so workers get employment only in the peak season like
harvesting and sowing seasons in agriculture.
● Frictional unemployment : The unemployment results due to changes in
demand and supply conditions in the market. It results when workers are
shifting over from one job to another.
● Voluntary unemployment :
There are jobs and people are not ready to take job at the prevailing wage
rate. This generally exists in advanced countries at large.



Various Development and Employment Programme in India :
 
Jawahar Gram Samridhi April Creation of demand driven community
Yojana (JGSY) 1999 village infrastructure
Bharat Nirman Programme Dec. Development of Rural Infrastruc -ture

16, including six components : Irrigation,
2005 Water Supply, Housing, Road,

Telephone and Electricity
National Rural Feb. 2, To provide atleast100 days wage
Employment Scheme 2006 employment in rural areas
Rastriya Swasthya Bima Oct. 1, Health insurance to all workers in
Yojana 2007 unorganised area below poverty line
Aam Aadmi Bima Yojana 2007 Insurance cover to the head of the

family of rural landless households in
the country

Rajiv Awas Yojana 2009 To Make India slum free in 5 years
Programme/Plan/Institution Year of Objective
Indira Gandhi Matritva 2010 Beginning
Sahyog Yojna (IGMSY) To improve the health and nutrition

status of pregnant lactating women and
infants.

Nirbhaya Fund 2013 For the security of women.
Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan 28 Fiscal consolidation, opening of atleast
Yojana Aug. one bank account for every family in

2014 the country.
Make in India 25 To make India manufacturing hub to

Sept. obtain larger foreign investment.
2014

Clean India Mission 02 Oct. Clean every village by the 150th birth
2014 Anniversary of Gandhiji till 2019

Sansad Adarsh Gram Yojna 11 Oct. Under this Yojna, MPs will be
2014 responsible for developing socio-



economic and physical of infrastructure
of 3 villages each by 2019, and total 8
villages each by 2024

Prime Minister Suraksha 2015 Compensation in case of Accidental
Bima Yojana death or become handicapped in

accident.
AMRUT (Atal Mission for 24 June Improve the quality of life in urban
Rejuvenation and Urban 2015 area's by providing basic services and
Transformation) building amenities.
DELP (Domestic Efficient July to replace the regular bulbs and CFL
Lighting Programme) 2015 light with LED lights
PMKSY (Pradhan Mantri 1, July Providing irrigation facilities to every
Krishi Sinchayee Yojana) 2015 village in the country
Digital India 2, July Creation of digital Infrastructure,

2015 delivering services digitally, and raise
Digital literacy.

Skill India 15, To create job and utilize the potential of
July youth.
2015

DUGJY 25, to provide 24x 7 uninterrupted
July electricity supply to each rural
2015 household across the country by 2022.

Sagarmala Project 31, to modernize India's ports for the
July development of country's tries
2015 economy.

SAHAJ Scheme 30 Union government has launched
Aug. Scheme for online booking of LPG.
2015

SPMRM (Shyama Prasad 16 for social, economic and infrastructure
Mukherji Rural Mission Sept. development in rural areas

2015
PMKKY (Pradhan Mantri 17 for welfare of people affected by
Khanij Kshetra Kalyan Sept. mining related operations.



Yojana) 2015
Project Neeranchal 7 Oct. to bring institutional changes in rainfed

2015 and watershed agricultural
management practices.

UDAY (Ujwal DISCOM 4 Nov. for financial restructuring of debt of
Assurance Yojana 2015 power distribution companies.
G.M.S (Gold Monetisation 5 Nov. Scheme will provide option to people
Scheme) 2015 to deposit their precious metal and earn

interest on it.
GIAN (Global Initiative of 30 for improving the quality of higher
Academic Networks) Nov. education in the country through
Scheme 2015 international collaboration.
Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima 13 Jan. It is new crop insurance scheme to
Yojana 2016 boost farming sector in the country.
Startup India, Standup 16 Jan. Promoting bank financing for start up
India Scheme 2016 ventures to boost entrepreneurship and

encourage start up with job creation.
Project Sunrise 5 Feb. for prevention of AIDS in North

2015 Eastern States.
Setu Bharatam Project 3 to make all national highways free of

March railway crossings by 2019.
2016

One Rank One Pension 6 April OROP will provide ex-servicemen
scheme (OROP) 2016 2016 of same rank and same length of
UJALA Scheme 1 May service with uniform pension

2016 regardless of date of retirement.
It is LED based Domestic Efficient
Lighting Programme (DELP)

Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala 1 May for providing free of cost LPG
Yojana 2016 connections to women from BPL

Households.
National Green Highways 1 July The mission aims to provide a green
Mission 2016 canopy along 100,000 km of highways



and create jobs for 1 million youth.
Krishi Vigyan Kendra 8 July The portal aims to provide information
(KVK) Portal 2016 and advisory to the farmers and

facilitate online monitoring of the KVK
Activities.

Pashudhan Bima Yojana 28 July It will provide insurance cover to cattle
(By Haryana Govt.) 2016 breeders in the state at different

premium rates for different animals.
MAA (Mothers' Absolute 5 Aug. Programme aims to enhance optional
Affection) Programme 2016 breastfeeding practices in the country.
Baristha Bunkar Sahayata 7 Aug. The scheme aims at improving the
yojana (By Odisha govt.) 2016 financial conditions of over 8,000

weavers in the state.
Mission Bhagiratha (By 7 Aug. It is a water grid project that aims to
Telangana Govt.) 2016 provide safe drinking water to all in the

state.
Biju Kanya Ratna Yojana 4 Sep. Objective of scheme is to improve Sex

2016 Ratio at Birth in three districts of the
state.

 



AGRICULTURE
Agriculture is a very important sector of the Indian economy. It plays a major
role in the overall development of the country as it contributes nearly one-
fifth of GDP and engages around 60 per cent of the population of the
country.
LAND REFORMS
● At the time of Independence, there were three types of land tenure systems
prevailing in the country viz., the Zamindari system, the Mahalwari system
and the Ryotwari system.
● The period from First Five Year Plan to Third Five Year Plan concentrated
on land reforms and institutional changes.
●  The steps took include abolition of Zamindari and tenancy reforms for
bringing about rapid agricultural growth.
● The aims and objectives associated with land reforms include :
i. Abolition of intermediaries ii. Security of rent iii. Ownership rights for
tenants iv. Redistribution of land v. Consolidation of holdings vi. Cooperative
farming,
GREEN REVOLUTION
It refers to the major increase in agricultural productivity due to the
introduction of High Yield Variety of Seeds (HYVS) together with new
techniques.
● Green Revolution led to a significant increase in the production of both
Wheat and Rice.
● The credit for ushering in the era of Green Revolution goes to Dr. Norman
Borlaug and Dr. M.S. Swaminathan.
● Dr. William Goud gave the term Green Revolution.
●  Green Revolution initiated the process of modernisation of Indian
Agriculture.
● Its negative aspect was that Green Revolution remained confined to wheat
and rice only. It did not cover pulses.
Various Revolutions

Revolution Commodity
Green Wheat, rice



Yellow Oilseeds
Golden Horticulture
Golden Fiber Jute
Rainbow Agriculture
White Milk
Blue Fish
Red Meat and Tomato
Pink Lobster (Fish)
Black Petroleum Products
Brown Fertilisers
Grey Wool
Round Potato
Silver Egg/poultry
Silver Fiber Cotton
Evergreen increase in productivity and prosperity

without ecological harm

AGRICULTURE PRICE POLICY
● The Commission on Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP) provide expert
advice to the government on price policy.
●  The Food Corporation of India (FCI) has been the Government’s
operational arm for entering the market to guarantee price support to farmers.
● Minimum Support Price (MSP) :
MSP is the price which is announced by the Government to purchase the
crop from the farmers directly if they are willing if crop prices become lower
than MSP.
● CACP recomends Minimum Supprt Price (MSPs) of 23 commodityies.
● Which comprises 7 cereals, 5 pulses, 7 oilseeds and 4 commercial crops, to
the central government.
● The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) gives approval for
the MSPs.
● For Sugarcane instead of MSP, “Fair and Remunerative Price” is declared.



● The main objectives behind MSPs are :
● To prevent fall in price & To protect the interest of farmers.
● Procurement Prices : Procurement prices are fixed at a higher levels as
compared to the MSP and are meant essentially for the purchase of quantities
needed by the Government for maintaining the PDS and for building the
buffer stocks.
●  Issue Prices : It indicates the prices at which the Government supplies
food grains through fair price shops and national depots.
NATIONAL BANK FOR AGRICULTURE AND RURAL
DEVELOPMENT (NABARD)
● NABARD was established on July 12, 1982. It was established with a paid
up capital of Rs. 100 crore having 50:50 contribution of Indian Government
and RBI.
●  NABARD is the apex institution providing finance for agriculture and
rural development.
Operation Flood
●  The largest ever dairy development project was launched in 1970,
popularly known as Operation Flood, with the object of setting up AMUL
like organisation in several states linking rural milk procurement points with
urban demand centres.
●  AMUL (Anand Milk Union Ltd.) at Anand in Kheda district of Gujarat
was set up in 1960s to promote cooperative movement in milk production
and marketing. AMUL subsequently began to serve as a model for future
development of dairy industry.
● Operation Flood II, launched in 1979, aimed at setting up a National Milk
Grid by linking rural milk sheds to major demand centres in urban areas.
● Now, India ranks first in the world in milk production.
MONEY & BANKING
Supply of Money
● There are four types of currency published in India called –M1, M2, M3,
M4.
● RBI calculates the four concepts of money supply in India
● M1 is called the narrow money



●  Currently Narrow Money (M1) and Broad money (M3) are relevant
indicators of money supply in India.
M0 = Reserve money or high power money currency with the public + other
deposits with the RBI + CRR themselves + CRR held with RBI.
M1 = Currecncy with the public + Demand deposit with the banking system
+ other deposit with the RBI.
M2 = M1 + saving deposits of post office, saving banks.
M3 = M1 + Time deposit with the banking system.
M4 = M3 + All deposits with the post office saving (excluding NSC)
Supply of Money M1

Currency with the public Demand Deposits with the Banks Other Deposits
with Reserve Bank Demand Deposits with Reserve Bank of Public Financial
Institutions Demand Deposits with Reserve Bank of Foreign Central bank
and Governments Demand Deposits of International Financial Institution
● Coins in India are limited legal tender.
● Paper currency is unlimited legal tender.
●  Narrow money is the most liquid part of the money supply because the
demand deposits can be withdrawn anytime.
Forms of Money
1. Fiat Money : Fiat money is money whose value is not derived from any
intrinsic value or guarantee that it can be converted into a valuable
commodity (Such as gold) : instead, it has value only by government order.
2. Credit Money : Credit money is money that is backed by a promise to
pay made by someone other than the state.
3. Fiduciary Money : Money that depends for its value and confidence that
is an accepted medium of exchange. It originated as a paper certificate that
was a promise to pay a certain amount of gold or silver to the bearer.
1. Deficit : Budget deficit refers to a situation when budget expenditures of
the government greater than the budget receipts.
There are three types of budget deficit—
1. Revenue Deficit 2. Fiscal Deficit 3. Primary Deficit
●  Revenue Deficit : It is excess of total revenue expenditure of the
government over its total revenue receipts. It is related to only revenue
expenditure and revenue receipts of the government.



● Revenue deficit signifies that government’s own earning is insufficient to
meet normal functioning of government departments and provision of
services.
● Revenue deficit results in borrowing. It occurs when government spends
more than what it collects by way of revenue, it incurs revenue deficit.
Main Remedies to Control
1. Government should raise rate of taxes. 2. Any new taxes
3. Reduce expenditure. 4. Avoid unnecessary expenditure
2. Fiscal Deficit : It is defined as excess of total budget expenditure over
total budget receipts excluding borrowing during a fiscal year.
●  Fiscal Deficit = Budget Expenditure (revenue + capital) — Budget
Receipts other than borrowings (revenue receipts + capital receipts other than
borrowings).
3. Primary Deficit : The borrowing requirements of the government include
interest obligations on accumulated debt. The primary deficit indicates the
deficit amount that the government needs to borrow for consumption and
investment purposes.
Primary Deficit = Gross Fiscal Deficit - Net Interest Liabilities
Objectives of Government Budget :
1. Economic Growth 2. Reduction of Poverty
3. Reduction of inequalities 4. Redistribution of incoming
5. Reallocation of resources 6. Price Stability
7. Financing and management of public enterprises.
Types of Budget : Budgets are of three types— (1) Balanced Budget (2)
Surplus Budget (3) Deficit Budget
1. Balanced Budget : A government budget is said to be a balanced budget
in which government estimated receipts are equal to government estimated
expenditure.
Government Receipts = Government expenditure It ensures financial stability.
It avoids wasteful expenditure.
2. Surplus Budget : When government receipts are more than government
expenditure in the budget the budget is called a surplus budget.
Estimated Govt. Receipts > Estimated Govt. Expenditure
● A surplus budget shows that government is taking
away more money than what it is pumping in the economic systems.
3. Deficit Budget : When government estimated expenditure exceeds
government receipts in the budget, the budget is said to be a deficit budget.



Deficit Budget = Govt. Expenditure > Govt. Receipt
Overall Balance of payments = Balance of payments on current account +
Balance of payments on capital account.
BALANCE OF PAYMENT
Balance of Payments on Current Account–It is made up of exports and
imports expenses on travel, transporation, insurance, investment, income,
transfer payments. It consists of visibles and invisibles.
Visibles refer to commodity exports and imports because these are recorded
at the custom barriers of the country.
Invisibles refer to service exports and imports e.g., transport charges,
shipping freight, passenger fares, harbour and canal dues, commercial
services (fees and commissions), financial services (brokers, fees), services
connected with the tourist traffic, payment of interest on external debt, and
inward remittances of funds by Non-resident Indians.
Balance of Payments on Capital
Account—It is made up of capital transactions e.g., borrowing and lending
of capital, repayment of capital, sale and purchase of securities and other
assets from foreigners—individuals and Governments.
It is the overall balance of payment which must be favourable.
Balance of Payments and Balance of Trade
Balance of trade = Value of commodity exports—Value of commodity
imports i.e. balance on visibles alone.
Balance of payments refers to the sum of both visibles and invisibles.
Balance of payments = Trade balance + Net invisibles
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI)
● FDI is a type of investment thai involves the injection of foreign funds into
an enterprises that operates in a different country of origin from the invester.
●  FDI play an extraordinary and growing role in global business. It can
provide a firm with new markets and marketing channels, cheaper production
facilities, access to new technology, products, skill and financing.
● FDI occurs when a company invests in a business that is located in another
country and it is investing not less than 10% of shares belonging to the
foreign company. It is a non-debt capital flow.
● FII (Foreign Institutional Investment).
● Foreign portfolio investment occurs, when foreign investment in the form
of shares, equities and bonds, is made by a foreign company.



● The three main institutions that handle FDI related issues in India are the
Foreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB), the Foreign Investment
Implementation Authority (FIIA) and the Secretariat for Industrial Assistance
(S1A) activities/ sectors not opened to private sector, viz railways and atomic
energy.
●  Since. 20th May, 2011 FDI in Limited Liability Partnership (LLP) has
been allowed.
Fdi Limits in Various Sectors

Sector/Activity % Entry Route
Defene Sector 49% Automatic route
Telecom Services 100% Automatic up to 49% govern-
Tea Plantation 100% ment route beyond 49% and upto 100%

Automatic up to 49% govern-
Asset Reconstruction 100% ment route beyond 49% and up to

100%
Automatic up to 49% government

Company  beyond 49% and up to 100%

Petroleum and Natural 49% Automatic Route
Gas
Commodity Exchanges 49% Automatic Route
Power Exchanges 49% Automatic Route
Stock 49% Automatic Route
Exchanges/Clearing
Corporations 74% Automatic Route
Credit information
Companies
Courier Services 100% Automatic Route
Single Brand Product 100% Automatic up to 49% government
Retail
trading  route beyond 49% and up to 100%

Insurance Sector 49% FIPB route



Multip Brand Retail 51% —
Print Media 49% —
Education 100% —
FM Radio 26% —

BANKING SYSTEM IN INDIA
●  Banking system occupies an important place in a nation’s economy. A
banking institution is indispensable in a modern society. It plays a pivotal
role in the economic development of a country and forms the core of the
money market in an advanced country.
SCHEDULED COMMERCIAL BANKS IN INDIA
The commercial banking structure in India consists of :
● Scheduled Commercial Banks in India
● Unscheduled Banks in India
● “Scheduled banks in India” bank being a bank included in the Second
Schedule to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934), but does not
include a co-operative bank”.
● “Non-scheduled bank in India” those banks which are not included in
the second shedule of RBI, 1934 as Non-scheduled Bank.
● Local Area Bank : Announced in the Union Budget 1996-97 to ensure a
focussed saving and credit Mobilisation by defining the clear boundary of
operation, the Local Area Bank operates to a narrow geographical area of
three contiguous districts. The private sector is also allowed entry in the
segment.
Regional Rural Bank (RRB)
The RRBs were established since the 1975, with objectives of developing
rural economy by providing credit and deposits facilities for agriculture and
other productive activities of all kinds in rural areas. The equity of the RRBs
is contributed by the central Government, concerned state Government and
the sponsor bank in proportion of 50 : 15 : 35. There are 56 RRBs at present.
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
● Reserve Bank of India (RBI) is the Central Bank of India. It was established
in April 1935 under Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 with authorised capital
of 5 crore. It was nationalised on January 1, 1949. It is fully owned by the



government of India. It is governed by a central board (headed by Governor)
appointed by the Central Government.
●  The Management of RBI rests with the Central Board of Directors
consisting of 14 Directors besides the one Governer and Four Deputy
Governer.
● The office of Local boards — New Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai, Chennai.
● These local boards function according to the Central Board.
Functions of RBI –
1. Issue of bank Notes. 2. Banker to the Government
3. Banker’s Bank 4. Controller of Credit
5. Custodian of foreign exchange reserves
6. Arrangement of agriculture credit.
7. Provide Facility of Clearing House to banks.
8. Supervisory functions.
9. Collecting and publishing economic data.
10. Selling of Government securities and trade bills.
Instruments of Credit Control Quantitative Measures
● Bank Rate  ● Cash Reserve Ratio  ● Repo Rate  ● Reverse Repo Rate  ● 
Statutory Liqudity Ratio  ● Open Market Operations
Qualitative Measures
● Rationing of credit
● Direct Action
(A) Quantitative Measures :
(1) Bank Rate : It is the rate at which the RBI is willing to lend to the
commercial banks. It is not the main tool to control money supply these days.
Bank rate Liquidity Demand Inflation control Bank rate Liquidity Demand
out from recession
(2) Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) : Commercial banks are required to keep a
certain amount of cash reserves at the central bank (RBI). This percentage
amount is called cash reserve Ratio. CRR is maintained only in cash form
with RBI.
(3) Repo Rate : It is the rate at which banks borrow rupees from RBI. Repo
rate is an instrument under Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) at which
RBI lends to commercial banks.
● Repo rate Liquidity Interest Demand Repo rate Liquidity Interest
(4) Reverse Repo Rate : It is a rate at which RBI borrows from commercial
banks.



● In case of inflationary tendencies, RBI can hike the reverse Repo Rate to
absorb the excess liquidity in the market.
Reverse Repo Rate Liquidity Price
(5) Statutory liquidity Ratio (SLR)
● Commercial banks are also required to keep a certain percentage of their
net demand and time liabilities (NDTL) as liquid assets in the shape of cash,
gold or approved securities.
(6) Liquid Adjustment facility (LAF) : It is a monetary police tool which
allows banks to borrow money through repurchase agreements.
● LAF consists of repo and reverse repo operations.
(7) Open Market operations : When RBI starts buying or selling
government securities to control money supply
(8) Marginal Standing Facility (MSF)
● MSF is the penal rate which banks can borrow money from the Central
Bank by pledging government securities within the limits of statutory
Liquidity Ratio (SLR).
(B) Qualitative Measures—
● Fixing minimum margins for lending against specific securities.
● Ceilings on amounts of credit for certain purpose.
● Discriminatory rates of interest for certain types of advances.
●  Cash Authorisation Scheme—Under this scheme, all commercial banks
have to obtain RBI’s authorisation before sanctioning any fresh credit above
certain limit.
●  Selective controls are focussed mainly on credit to traders for financing
inventories (for purposes of hoarding and speculation). In recent years,
selective controls have been used with great effect.
Printing Press
1. Indian Security Press — Nasik (Maharashtra)
2. Security Printing Press – Hyderabad (Telangana)
3. Currency Press Note – Nasik (Maharashtra)
● Printing of Rs. 10, 50, 100, 500 and 1000 notes and supply.
4. Bank Note Press – Devas (Madhya Pradesh)
● Printing of Rs. 20, 50, 100, 500 notes and supply.
● Making of ink of currency notes.
5. Security Paper Mill –Hoshangabad (M.P)
● Currency note paper



● Non judicial stamps.
6. Shahbani (West Bengal, and Mysuru Karnataka)
● New currency notes under RBI.
Capital Market
Capital markets are markets for buying and selling equity and debt
instruments.
Capital market channel savings and investment between suppliers of capital
such as retail investors and institutional investors, and users of capital like
business, government and individuals. Capital market are vital to the
functioning of an economy, since capital is a critical component for
generating economic output. Capital markets include primary markets, where
new stock and bond issues are sold to investors, and secondary markets,
where trading of existing securities.
Demat Trading
●  Trading in shares, bonds, debentures in electronic mode through the
depositors mechanism.
● There are two depositories : NSDL & CSDL NSDL (National Securities
Depositories Ltd.) 1996 CSDL (Central Depositories Services Ltd.) 1998
Mutual Funds —
● These funds are sizeable collections of savings by a no. of investors and
are managed by a form of specialists (who make up for individual investor’s
lack of knowledge of capital market).
They are marked by relative safety and optimum returns to investors.
● Set up by public sector banks, financial institutions and private corporate
sector, under the guidelines by SEBI.
Mutual Funds in India —
●  Mutual fund is an instrument of investing money in stock market. A
mutual fund is a group of investors operating through a fund manager to
purchase a diverse portfolio of stocks or bonds. Mutual funds are highly cost
efficient and very very to invest in.
Stock Exchange
● Stock exchanges in the country—
● Regional includes Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE)
●  National only three— (1) National Stock Exchange (NSE), Bombay (2)
Over the Counter Exchange of India Ltd. (OTCEI) (3) Inter Connected Stock
Exchange of India Ltd. (ISE)



● Phelwani Committee (1991) recommended for establishment of NSE in
1992, Government authorized IDBI for establishing NSE. Thus IDBI is the
main promoter of NSE.
●  Bull : A spectacular on the stock exchange or on a commodity market,
who buys shares in the anticipation of rising prices so that they can be later
resold at a profit.
● Bear : A spectacular who sells shares in anticipation of falling prices to
buy then back and thus make a profit.
● Footsie is ‘Financial Times Stock Exchange 100 share Index.’ Published
by Financial Times of London. MIBOR (Mumbai Inter-bank Offer Rate)–
Landing rate for loans MIBIR (Mumbai Inter-bank Bid Rate) – Landing rate
for recipients
Bombay Stock Exchange
●  Bombay Stock Exchange Limited is the oldest stock exchange in Asia.
Popularly known as BSE it was established as ‘The Native Share & Stock
Brokers Assiciation’ in 1875. It is the first stock exchange in India to obtain
permanent recognition in 1956 from the Government of India under the
securities Controls (Regulation) Act, 1956.
Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)—
● Set up as non-statutory body in April, 1988
● Given statutory status in 1992
Functions :
● Oversee the working of stock exchanges
● Regulate merchant banks and mutual funds.
● Register and regulate intermediaries such as stock brokers.
● Curb fraudulent and unfair trade practices including insider tradings.
● Promote the development of a healthy capital market.
Money Market
● While the Government securities market generally caters to the investors
with a long-term investment horizon, the money market provides investment
avenues of short term tenor.
● Money market transactions are generally used for funding the transactions
in other markets including Government securities as market and meeting
short form liquidity mismatches.
● By definition, money market is for a maximum tenor of up to one year.
Within the one year, depending upon the tenors, money market is classified



into :
(1) Overnight market — the tenor of transactions is one working day.
(2) Notice money market—The tenor of transactions is from 2 days to 14
days.
(3) Term money market—The tenor of the transactions is from 15 days to
one year.
● NEFT : National Electronic Funds Transfer is a nation wide system that
facilitates individuals, firms and corporates to electronically transfer funds
from any bank branch to any individual, firm or corporate having an account
with any other bank branch in the country.
●  IFSC : Indian Financial System Code is an alpha-numeric code that
uniquely identifies a bank branch participating in the NEFT system. This is a
11 digit code with first 4 alpha characters representing the bank, and the last
6 numeric characters representing the branch. The 5th Character is zero.
INSURANCE SECTOR :
●  An Ordinance was issued on 19th January 1956 nationalising the Life
Insurance sector.
●  In 1972 with the passing of the General Insurance Business
(Nationalisation) Act, general insurance business was nationalized with
effect from 1st January 1973.
GIC holds four companies :
(i) National Insurance Company Ltd.
(ii) New India Assurance Company Ltd.
(iii) Oriental Fire and Insurance Company Ltd.
(iv) United India Insurance Company Ltd.
● The IROA opened up the market in August 2000 with the invitation for
application for registrations. he Authority has the power to frame regulations
under section 114-A of the Insurance Act 1938 and has framed various
regulations ranging from registration of companies to protection of
policyholders interests.
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) :
● IRDA was set up in 2000 through Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Act, 1999.  Authority is responsible for the regulation, development and
supervision of the Indian insurance Industry.
 



GENERAL SCIENCE
###PHYSICS###

Physics is the branch of science that deals with the study of matter and
energy and their inter–relationship.
MOTION
● Motion is change in position of a body with time and a reference point.
● Types of Motion are, Linear Motion, Curvilinear and Rotatory Motion.
●  Scalar quantities : Those physical quantities which are completely
described by their magnitude (size) alone, are known as scalar quantities, e.g.
length or distance, mass, time, area, volume, work, power, energy,
temperature, speed, pressure, charge and potential.
●  Vector quantities : Those physical quantities which are completely
described only if their magnitudes as well as directions are known are called
vector quantities, e.g. displacement, velocity, acceleration, force, weight,
momentum and electric field.
DISTANCE
● The distance traveled by a body is the actual length of the path covered by
a moving body irrespective of the direction in which the body travels. It is a
scalar quantity having magnitude only.
DISPLACEMENT
● When a body moves from one position to another, the shortest distance
between the initial position and final position of the body along with
direction is known as its displacement. It is vector quantity having magnitude
as well as direction.
SPEED
● Speed is the scalar form of velocity. It is defined as the distance traveled in
one second.
● If the body covers a distance d in time t, then speed V = d/t.
AVERAGE SPEED
●  If a body has travelled ‘S1’ and ‘S2’ distance with ‘V1’ and ‘V2’
velocities, then, Average speed = Total distance/Total time



VELOCITY
● The rate of change of displacement is called velocity.
● V = s/t It is a vector quantity.
● Velocity may be positive and negative or zero depending on displacement.
UNIFORM VELOCITY
●  When a body covers equal displacement in equal interval of time, the
velocity is said to be uniform.
● Acceleration is absent if the body moves with uniform velocity as initial
velocity equals final velocity.
VARIABLE VELOCITY
● When a body covers unequal displacement in equal intervals of time then it
is said to have variable velocity.
● Acceleration is necessarily present in this motion.
● In this case either direction of velocity or magnitude or both change with
respect to time e.g. speed is constant in uniform circular motion but velocity
is variable with change in direction.
AVERAGE VELOCITY
1. Average velocity is zero if the body returns to starting point in the given
time interval.
2. If the body covers first half distance with velocity v1 and next half with
velocity v2 then the average velocity
● A body whose velocity reduces with the passage of time, it is said to be
undergoing deceleration or retardation.
● The acceleration of a moving body is the rate of change of its velocity, i.e.,
; where ‘a’ is the acceleration, ‘u’ is the initial velocity which becomes ‘v’ in
‘t’ second.
ACCELERATION
●  Time rate of change in velocity is known as acceleration. It is a vector
quantity.
● Negative acceleration is known as retardation. It indicates that the velocity
of the object is decreasing with respect to time as on application of brakes of
a body in motion.
VARIABLE ACCELERATION



● If the velocity of the body changes in different amounts during the same
time intervals, then the acceleration of the body is known as variable
acceleration.
● Acceleration is variable if either its direction or magnitude or both changes
with respect to time, e.g. a body in uniform circular motion is accelerated
motion.
UNIFORM ACCELERATION
● If the velocity of the body changes by same amounts in same intervals of
time, then the acceleration of the body is known as uniform acceleration, e.g.
acceleration due to gravity otherwise not such as a motor cyclist riding on a
busy city road.
UNIFORM CIRCULAR MOTION
● When a particle moves in a circle at a constant speed then motion is said to
be uniform circular motion.
●  In circular motion as position of particle changes so also its velocity.
Hence, the circular motion, is considered as accelerated motion.
● In circular motion acceleration which is always directed towards the centre
of circle is called centripetal acceleration.
EQUATIONS OF MOTION
(i) v = u + at, (ii) (iii) v2 = u2 + 2as; Where initial velocity = u Final velocity
= v Elapsed time = t Acceleration = a Distance/displacement covered = s
●  The acceleration caused by the earth’s attraction is known as the
acceleration due to gravity and it is identified by the symbol ‘g’. Mean value

of ‘g’ is 9.8 m/s2.
● If the body travels downwards, then ‘g’ is positive. However, if the body is
projected vertically upwards, then ‘g’ is negative.
LAWS OF MOTION
● Newton’s First Law of Motion :
Every body continues to be in a state of rest or of uniform motion, unless
compelled by an external force to change that state. This first law is also
called law of Inertia.
● Newton’s Second Law of Motion : The rate of change of momentum is
directly proportional to the applied force and takes place in the direction in



which the force acts.
● The second law can also be termed as the law of acceleration.
● Newton’s Third Law of Motion :
For every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction.
● The force acts on two different bodies in opposing directions.
FORCE AND INERTIA
● A force is that pull or push which changes or tends to change the state of
motion of a body or its shape.
● The tendency of a body to remain in the same state it is, either stationary or
moving, is called its inertia.
● The more the mass of the objects, the greater is their inertia.
● The force (F) which causes an acceleration (a) in a moving object of mass
(m) is given by F = ma

● The SI unit of force is Newton (kg.ms–2).
BANKING OF TRACKS
● For a vehicle to make a safe and easier turn roads on large highways are
generally banked i.e. road bend at the curved path is raised a little on the
sideways away from centre. With this banking of road, a component of
normal force points towards the centre of curvature of road. It supplies the
necessary centripetal force required for circular motion. The vertical
component is balanced by the weight of vehicle.
MOMENTUM
● The force which a body possesses, due to the combined effect of its mass
and velocity is called momentum (p = mv).
● The greater the mass and velocity of an object, the larger is its momentum.
● For example, cars are heavy and fast. Thus, they have enough momentum
to crumple steel and break down brick walls when they crash to a halt.
● According to the law of conservation of momentum, in a colliding system,
the total momentum remains conserved.
m1u1 + m2u2 = m1v1 + m2v2
● When a force of very large magnitude is applied on a body for a very short
interval of time, then collective effect of force and time is called impulse.
● It’s impulse that allows some people break bricks on a single hit.



GRAVITY
● Gravity is the force which pulls all bodies towards the centre of the earth,
keeps the planet revolving round the sun in definite paths and is responsible
for the weight of all objects.
● A falling body accelerates under the influence of gravity.
● Different masses, fall to the ground together, because acceleration due to
gravity is same for all objects.
●  Greater the masses and smaller the separation, greater is the force of
attraction. It is called Gravitational Force.
● The value of acceleration due to gravity, i.e., ‘g’ decreases both with height
and depth.
● The radius of the earth is slightly more at the equator than at the poles. So,
‘g’ is less at the equator than at the poles.
● Therefore, artificial satellites are launched from the places near or on the
equator.

ESCAPE VELOCITY It is the minimum velocity with which a body must
escape or projected away from earth surface such that it never return.
For earth it value is 11.2 km/sec and for moon = 2.4 km/sec.
MASS AND WEIGHT
● Mass is measure of the atoms contained in an object, and the number of
atoms in the object remains constant.
● So, mass is an intrinsic, unchanging property of matter.
● The force with which a body is attracted towards earth is called weight. W
= mg; where ‘W’ is the weight and ‘m’ is the mass.
● Mass is measured with the help of physical (beam) balance, while a spring
balance also called Newtonmeter measures the weight of an object. The unit
of mass is kg but that for weight is Newton (N).
CHANGES IN APPARENT WEIGHT IN ELEVATOR
●  Based on Newton’s Second law, when accelerating upward one feels
heavier and accelerating downward, one feels lighter. If the elevator’s cable
breaks, one would feel weightlessness because both elevator and the person
would accelerate downwards at the same rate.
FRICTION



●  Friction is a kind of force that opposes relative motion. It comes into
existence at the common boundary of two bodies in contact with one another,
when one of them either moves or tends to move relative to the other.
● Force of friction does not depend on the area of contact.
● Frictional force increases with weight.
● On rough surfaces, frictional force is more than that on the smooth surfaces
because of more interlocking.
●  Less force is needed to maintain motion than to initiate it i.e., Kinetic
friction < Static friction.
● The vehicles are provided with wheels and their axles are supported with
ball bearings, because the rolling friction is much less than the sliding
friction.
●  Friction is necessary for the operation of belts, pulleys, clutches and
brakes. Nails and screws remain firmly fixed in which they are driven
because of friction.
● Therefore, friction is considered as necessary evil.
WORK, POWER AND ENERGY
●  Work is said to be done only, when a force or its component causes
displacement in its own direction or stops a body in motion or changes the
body’s shape.

● In SI system, unit of work is called Joule. (kg m25–2)
● W = F × d; where ‘W’ is the work done, ‘F’ is the force and ‘d’ is the
displacement.
●  Rate of doing work is called power. Power (P) can be defined as the
product of force (f) and velocity (v). P = Fv
●  In SI system, absolute unit of power, work done/time is called

Joules/second (JS–1) or Watt or 1 kw = 1000 w.
● The capacity of a body to do work is called energy.
● Energy is the total amount of work done by a body, therefore, its unit is the
same as that of work (Joule).
●  Conveniently, energy is divided into (i) potential energy and (ii) kinetic
energy.
● When a body does work by virtue of its motion, it is said to have kinetic
energy. If ‘m’ is the mass of the body, moving with an initial velocity v, then



its Kinetic Energy (K.E.) is given by K.E. = 1/2 mv2
● If a body of mass ‘m’ be raised vertically through a height ‘h’ against the
acceleration due to gravity ‘g’, then its Potential Energy (P.E.) is P.E. = mgh.
● When a body is on the surface of earth, then the potential energy between
the system of body, and the earth is zero.
● When the body moves vertically upward, i.e., the height of the body from
ground increases, the potential energy between the system of the earth and
the body also increases.
●  Satellites : There are two type of satellites remote sensing, weather
forecasting satellites etc.
mostly placed close to earth at height of 800 km or above.
●  Telecommunication satellites also called geostationary satellite which
appear stationary are placed at height of 36,000 km from earth surface.
Kepler’s Laws of planetary motion :
(i) All planets are revolving elliptical orbit.
(ii) All planets sweeps equal area is equal interval of time when revolving
around the sun.
(iii) The square of time period of a planet around the sun is proportional to
the cube of the semi major axis of the ellipse.
INTERCONVERSION OF ENERGY
● When hands are rubbed, the mechanical energy due to friction changes into
heat energy.
●  When two stones are struck, the mechanical energy changes to heat and
light energy.
● When brakes are applied, the mechanical energy changes to heat energy at
the point where brakes rub against moving wheel.
●  When an arrow is stretched in a bow, the mechanical energy changes to
potential energy.
●  On releasing string, the potential energy changes to kinetic energy of
arrow.
●  The water stored in dams has gravitational potential energy. When this
water is released, it changes to kinetic energy of flowing water.
● The kinetic energy of flowing water turns blades of turbine and changes to
mechanical energy.
●  This mechanical energy of turbine drives dynamo to generate electricity
i.e., changes to electric energy.



●  When a torch is switched on, the chemical energy changes to electric
energy. The electric energy on flowing through filament of bulb changes to
heat and light energy.
FLUID PRESSURE
●  Pressure is defined as the thrust acting per unit area of the surface of
contact i.e., P = F/A
● Where ‘P’ is the pressure, ‘F’ is the thrust and ‘A’ is the area over which
the thrust is acting. Thrust is force that acts normal to surface. The SI unit of

pressure is known as pascal (Nm–2).
● The smaller the area on which force acts, greater is its impact e.g., if an
elephant steps on a persons chest, ribs would crack but in circus a person
shows the same with a light but strong wooden blank placed on chest
because of large area.
● Pascal’s law states that a change in pressure is applied to an enclosed fluid
is transmitted undiminished to every point of the fluid and walls of
containing vessel. A fluid means a liquid or gas.
● Hence, the law states that a liquid exerts pressure equally in all directions.
●  Hydraulic breaks, flying of an airplane are based on the pressure and
Bernaullies principle.
●  Archimedes’ Principle : When a body is immersed in a liquid fully or
partially, it suffers an upthrust which is equal to the weight of liquid
displaced by the immersed part of it.
● The result of the upthrust is an apparent loss of weight of the body when
immersed in the liquid.
●  Therefore a body weighs more in air then when partally or wholly
immersed in water.
● Surface Tension : It is a scalar physical quantity being unidirectional is
defined as the property of surface of a liquid by which it tends to contract
and occupy the minimum possible surface area i.e. the upper surface acts as a
stretched membrane.
● With rise in temperature it decreases except in case of molten copper and
cadmium.
Tsolid > Tliquid > Tgas with tags = 0
● With addition of any impurity surface tension decreases if the impurity is
sparing in soluble in water e.g soap added to water.



● But if increases if impurity is soluble like common salt or sugar added to
water.
● When a wire bent in form of a ring is clopped into soap solution, and then
taken out, a film is formed due to surface tensions.
● Surface tension of liquid metals like that of mercury is very high.
● An egg floats in water because of surface tension. It acts as if placed on a
stretched membrance.
● Capillarity : It refers to rise or depression of a liquid in a capillary tube
● It’s application involves
(1) Rising of oil/molten wax through wick in a candle.
(2) Action of towel in soaking up moisture from body.
(3) Absorption of water by root hair in soil.
● Hydro dynamics : It is the science of fluids in motion.
● Principle of continuity :
According to principle, in case of steady flow of incompressible and non-
viscous fluid through a tube of non-uniform cross section, the product of area
of cross section and velocity of flow remains same at every point in tube.
AV = constant The velocity of flow increases with decrease in area of cross
section. Therefore, deep water appear to be still and falling stream of water
becomes same.
● Viscosity : It is the property of a fluid because of which it opposes the
relative motion between different layers and the acting force is called viscous
force. It depends on nature of fluid and is independent of area. viscosity of
liquids > viscosity of gases, glass being the most viscous.
viscosity increases with density for liquids, but with rise in temperature it
decreases for liquids, with increasing pressure of liquid, it increases but
decreases in case of gases.
HEAT AND THERMODYNAMICS
●  Heat is a form of energy that flows from one body to another due to
temperature difference between them. It is the combined energy of all
molecules moving inside a body.
● Temperature is only a measure of how fast these molecules are moving.
The faster the molecules in a body vibrate, the hotter it is.
● The flow of heat from one body to another continues until both the sides
are at the same temperature.
● The two bodies are then said to be in ‘Thermal Equilibrium’.



● In general, matter (whether solid, liquid or gas) expands when heated and
contracts when cooled except water which shows anomalous behaviour. It
expands on cooking with reducing density. It is this property of water that
allows aquatic animals to survive on freezing of water in lakes or rivers.
●  Black or dark bodies absorb heat while white or bright, shiny surfaces
reflect away the heat.
● Black colours are good absorber and emitter of heat.
● Kelvin is the SI unit of temperature. The temperature is expressed in kelvin
and not in degree kelvin.
TRANSMISSION OF HEAT
● The process of net energy transfer through a substance without movement
of the substance itself is called conduction.
● Specific heat : The amount of heat required to change the temperature of a
body.
● Thermal Capacity : It is the quantity of heat energy required to raise the
temperature of body by unit.
Thermal capacity = mass of body × specific heat
● Water equivalent : It refers to amount of water that absorbs or gives out
the same amount of heat as is done by body when heated by 1°C.
●  Latent heat : The amount of heat energy gained or lost when a body
undergoes a change in its phase from solid to liquid to gas or viceversa as
latest heat of fusion or latest heat of vapourization.
●  Transmission of heat : It occure through conduction, convection or
radiation.
● The process of transfer of heat energy within the heated medium by the
movement of the substance within itself is known as convection.
● The process of transfer of heat from one body to another without requiring
any medium is called radiation.
● Very poor conductors, such as glass and plastics, are called insulators.
●  All substances expand on heating exerting more pressure on side walls
hence expand.
Newton Law of cooling : rate of cooling of a hot body is directly
proportional to temperature difference between the body and its surrounding
i.e. amount of heat lost = amount of gained by other body.
● Black body : A body that absorbs all the radiations incident on its surface
is called a perfect black body should neither reflect nor turns unit any



radiation which is not 100% possible. It always appear black despite of the
colour of radiation incident its surface.
MAGNETISM
● Magnetism is the branch of physics concerned with magnetic phenomenon.
● Materials can be divided broadly into three categories.
(i) Diamagnetic Substances
(ii) Paramagnetic Substances
(iii) Ferromagnetic Substances
●  Diamagnetic substances are those substances which are repelled by a
magnet. e.g. copper, lead, gold, zinc, tin, water, air, antimony.
●  Paramagnetic substances are attracted by a magnet very feebly, e.g.,
Aluminium, Chromium, Oxygen, Platinum.
●  Ferromagnetic substances are attracted by magnets and can also be
magnetised. e.g. Iron, Cobalt, Nickel.
● Ferromagnetic substances behave just like paramagnetic materials but the
effect is much more intense.
Paramagnetic Diamagnetic Ferromagnetic
● The area around a magnet in which one magnetic strength of a magnet is
experienced, is called magnetic field.
● In a bar magnet, the magnetic strength is maximum at the corner rejoins
called poles than in the middle of magnet.
SOME IMPORTANT FACTS ABOUT MAGNETISM
● The regions of strongest magnetisation near the ends of a magnet are called
poles of the magnet.
● The distance between the two poles of a magnet is known as the effective
length of the magnet.
●  An imaginary line bisecting the effective length of the magnet, at right
angles to it, is called the magnetic equator of the magnet.
●  The induced magnetism acquired by soft iron is temporary, whereas the
induced magnetism acquired by steel is more or less permanent i.e., steel has
greater retentivity and it has higher coercivity i.e., resistance to lose
magnetism than iron.
●  Magnetic materials which retain magnetism for considerable time are
known as hard materials and those which lose magnetism easily are called
soft materials.
● Iron is an example of a soft material while steel is a hard material.



● The rapid spinning of the Earth creates electric currents in the molten core,
which are responsible for the magnetic field around the earth.
● Repulsion, and not attraction, is the surest test for polarity of a magnet.
● Certain types of iron, which once magnetised retain their magnetism, are
called permanent magnets.
●  An insulated copper wire wounded on some cylindrical card board or
plastic tube, such that its length is greater than its diameter and it behaves
like a magnet when current is made to flow through is a solenoid.
●  Curie temperature : It refers to the temperature at which a given
substance changes its magnetic property for example form ferromagnetic to
paramagnetic etc.
● Galvanometer is an instrument used for :
(i) detecting the flow of current in an electric circuit, (ii) finding the direction
of flow of current, (iii) measuring the strength of current, (iv) making
measuring devices, such as voltmeter and ammeter.
ELECTRICITY
●  Electricity is the phenomenon associated with stationary or moving
electrons, ions or other charged particles.
● The electricity produced by friction is called frictional electricity.
●  If the charges in a body do not move, then the frictional electricity is
known as static electricity i.e., study of charges at rest.
●  The electricity i.e., charges that travels along wires is called current
electricity.
● An electric current is defined as an electric charge in motion. The unit of
current is ampere and it is measured with the help of an instrument called
ammeter.
●  The opposition or obstruction offered by a conductor to the passage of
drifting electrons is called electric resistance. It’s unit is ohm.
●  Resistance of conductor is directly proportional to its length, inversely
proportional to its area of cross-section and upon the nature of conductor.
● Resistance of pure metals increases with the rise in temperature.
FACTS TO REMEMBER
● Fuse is a safety device in an electrical circuit. It is the weakest point in an
electrical circuit,which melts and breaks the electric circuit, when the circuit
gets :



(i) overloaded due to large withdrawal of current, (ii) due to short-circuiting
in the electric circuit, (iii) due to fluctuations of current in power supply
system.
● Fuse wire has a low melting point, and high resistance.
● Earthing protects the user and the appliance from electric shock and burn
out respectively.
● Household distribution of electricity is done in parallel, so that :
(i) if there is short-circuit or overloading in one particular circuit, then only
the fuse of that circuit will melt, but the power supply to other circuits
remains unaffected.
● Switches are always placed in live wire, so that an appliance is completely
cut off from live wire in off position that carry charges (electrons) with
energy.
● Thus, a user will not receive any accidental shock.
●  According to new international convention for colour coding of electric
wires, Red or brown is for live wire, light blue or black for neutral wire
and green or yellow for earth wire.
● Nichrome and Manganin are the common alloys used for making heating
elements of electric appliances, because they have good resistivity, high
melting point, low thermal expansion and do not get oxidised till 1000°C.
● In most of the cases, nichrome is used as heating element, e.g., in electric
iron, electric heater, geyser etc.
● The filament of electric bulb is made up of tungsten.
● The bulb is filled with a mixture of nitrogen and argon gases at very low
pressure. They being chemically inert.
DIRECT CURRENT AND ALTERNATIVE CURRENT
●  Direct Current or DC is that whose magnitude remains constant as a
function of time.
●  An Alternating Current or AC is that which varies in magnitude
continuously and whose direction varies periodically.
● Dry cells or batteries are source of d.c. but generator or power station is
that of a.c.
ELECTRIC MOTOR
●  When a current carrying rectangular conductor is placed in a magnetic
field at right angles to it, the forces acting on the two parallel lengths will be
equal and opposite thus constituting a couple.



● The conductor therefore rotate as per Flemings left hand rule. This is the
principle of electric motor.
DYNAMO It works on the reverse principle of the motor, i.e. Electro-
magnetic induction i.e., when a coil wrapped with wire is rotated between
opposite poles of two strong magnets, an e.m.f. is induced in the coil based
on Fleming's Right Hand rule.
TRANSFORMER
●  Transformer is an electric device, by which the e.m.f. of an alternating
current can be increased or decreased as per need of a particular situation.
COULOMB’S LAW
●  Force of attraction or repulsion between two point charges is directly
proportional to the product of the magnitude of charges and inversely
proportional to the square of the distance between them, acting in the
direction of the line joining the points. In SI system N
INTENSITY OF ELECTRIC FIELD
● The force experienced by a point charge of 1 coulomb in any electric field
is called the intensity of the–electric field at that point.

It is a vector quantity and its unit is Unit – N/C (NC–1)
ELECTRIC POTENTIAL (V) It is defined as the amount of work done
(W) in bringing a unit positive charge (q) from infinity to any electric field.
POTENTIAL DIFFERENCE
● The amount of work required in moving a charge of 1 Coulomb from a
point to the another is called the potential difference between those points.
OHM’S LAW
● The amount of electric current passing through any conductor is directly
proportional to the potential difference between its both ends i.e. V ∝ I or V
= IR (R is constant of proportionality) at any given temperature.
ATOMIC AND NUCLEAR PHYSICS
● Rutherford first invented the nucleus.
● X rays are produced when high speed electrons fall on tungsten.
● Radioactivity was discovered by ‘Henry Becquerel.’
Comparison of Alpha (α), Beta (β) and Gama (γ) Particles



Properties α particles β particles γ particles
Symbol 2He4 P Y

Mass 4 1/2000 0
Charge +2 -1 0
Speed slow fast Velocity of light
Ionising ability high medium 0
Penetrating low medium high
power 1/100 mm 1mm to 5mm 30 cm sheet
Can Stopped by paper aluminium lead
Magnitude of 3.3x10-19C 1.6x10-19C Zero
charge deflected deflected No effect
Effect of electric
and magnetic field Maximum moderate minimum
Ionising power
● Photo electric effect is the phenomenon of emission of electrons from a
metal surface when light of suitable frequency becomes incident on it.
●  The process by which a heavy radioactive nuclei is broken into lighter
nuclei by the bombardment of slow moving neutron, so as to liberate energy
and more neutrons than used for bombardment is called nuclear fission.
●  Chain reaction is the phenomenon in which neutrons liberated during
fission process lead to further fission of atoms, releasing a large amount of
energy.
●  If the fission process is carried out under controlled conditions, i.e., the
neutron formed during fission are absorbed by the control rods made up of
graphite and boron, then the energy so released can be utilised in producing
steam which can be further used in running turbines to generate electricity
such as in nuclear power stations.
● The process of combining lighter nuclei (atomic weight less than 20) into
heavier nuclei is called nuclear fusion. It is for this particular high
temperature, the fusion reaction are sometimes called thermonuclear
reaction.



●  The principle of nuclear fusion is used in Hydrogen bomb and energy
irradiated by sun and stars.
● Geiger counter is used for measuring radioactivity.
●  The radiation which is omnipresent on the earth because of radioactive
substances and cosmic ray particles are called background radiation.
● Radioactive property of carbon is used in carbon-14 dating to determine
the age of fossils.
Uses of radio isotopes :
P-32 : Treatment of skin diseases, lukemia, blood cancer.
J-134 : Treatment of thyriod gland.
Na-24 : Treatment of defects in blood circulation.
Co-60 : Treatment of Cancer C-14 : Estimating age of fossils.
● Half life : It is the time after which the amount of radioactive element
becomes half of the initial mass after releasing radiations. It is based on

principle E = mc2 in which mass is converted/lost to produce energy. ‘C’ is
the speed of light.
● Uranium obtained from earth crust can not directly be used as fuel. It needs

to be enriched i.e., U238
● In nuclear reactor instead of uranium, thorium or polonium can also be
used as nuclear fuels.
● Nuclear reactor : A nuclear reactor consists of five main components:

● Fuel : Some common fuels are uranium isotopes U233, U235, thorium

isotopes Th232 and plutonium isotop Pu 239.
● Moderator : Used to slow down the emitted neutrons. Commonly used
moderators are graphite, heavy water, beryllium, beryllium oxide and some
organic liquids.
● Coolant : Used to remove excessive heat developed inside the reactor core
some commonly used coolants are water, steam, helium, CO2, air, molten
metals etc.
● Control rods : Used to initiate or stop the nuclear fission reactions of the
nuclear reactor.
Cadmium and boron rods are used as control rods.
● In nuclear fission, a bigger nuclei is broken into smaller nuclei and there is
a huge amount of energy released.



● Atom Bomb and nuclear bomb work on nuclear fission.
●  When two or more smaller nuclei are jointed together to form a large
nuclei, the process is called nuclear fusion.
● A great amount of energy is released. Hydrogen bomb works on principle
of nuclear fusion.
● Nuclear fusion is the source of the Solar energy.
●  Cadmium is a good absorber of neutrons, used as controller in atomic
reaction.
● Nuclear reactor is based on controlled chain reaction.
SPECIFIC HEAT OF WATER
● Ice has the highest specific latent heat. So, compared to other matter, it
requires higher amount of energy for melting. That’s why;
(i) Water bodies in cold countries do not freeze suddenly, (ii) Snow melts
slowly on the mountains in the summers, due to which, there are no flash
floods, and the rivers contain water for whole year, (iii) Soft drinks are
cooled by ice rather than iced cold water.
● Boiling point of a liquid rises with presence of dissolved impurities.
● Therefore sometimes salt is added to slow down the melting of ice.
● The phenomenon due to which, a liquid changes into its vapour state at any
temperature, without the aid of any external source of heat is called
evaporation. Evaporation is basically the internal property of a liquid and it
produces cooking effect.
OPTICS
● Light is the physical cause which produces sensation of sight and makes
the surrounding objects visible to us.
● Bodies which themselves emit light are called luminous objects.
● The luminous objects are usually hot. However, cold luminous objects also
exist. The sun and the stars are examples of hot luminous objects, whereas,
the light emitting diodes used in digital instruments, fire fly and electric ray
fish are examples of cold luminous objects.
● Reflection is the phenomenon whereby light, on striking an opaque surface
is thrown back into the same medium provided that angle of incidence is
equal to angle of reflection with respective at normal down at point of
incidence.
● An opaque body absorbs and transmit some of the light that falls on it but
majorly reflects the remaining light.



● A transparent body like glass or water transmits almost all the light that
passes through it.
● A smooth shining surface like a mirror reflects away almost all the light
incident on it.
MIRRORS
● The image formed by a plane mirror is erect, laterally inverted and virtual.
Also, it has the same size as the object and is as far behind the mirror as the
object is in front of it.
● If a person approaches a plane mirror at a distance with speed of 1m/s then
image would approach the person at speed of 2m/s.
● A polished surface is visible only from that direction in which it reflects
the light.
●  In reflection from irregular surfaces, the object can be seen from all
directions.
●  A man can see the whole of his body in a mirror provided the size of
mirror is minimum half of his own height.
● A set of two parallel mirrors produces theoretically an infinite number of
images. However, in practice only a limited number of images are observed,
since each successive image is fainter than the preceeding one.
●  The portion of the mirror from where reflection actually takes place is
known as aperture.
●  In a concave mirror, the image is always real except when the object is
within the focal length.
● In the latter case, the image is virtual, erect and magnified.
● In a convex mirror, irrespective of the position of the object, the image is
always behind the mirror. It is always virtual, small size and the image
distance from the mirror is always less than the object’s distance.
● The image formed by a concave mirror might be an enlarged or diminished
one depending upon the position of the object.
● But in a convex mirror, the image is always a diminished image.
● Image formation by concave mirror

Position of object Position of size of image Nature of image
At focus Highly enlarged at infinity Real and inverted
Between pole of mirror and Enlarged/magnified behind virtual and erect
focus the mirror



Between focus (f) and Enlarged beyond centre of Real and inverted
centre of curvature (c) curvature
At centre of curvature Equal size as object at Real and inverted

centre of curvature
Beyond centre of curvature Diminished and between Real and inverted

centre of curvature and
focus

Virtual image by concave mirror
● A concave mirror is used as shaving mirror, Doctor’s reflector, reflectors of
search light, in terrestrial telescope etc.
● A convex mirror or a diverging mirror is used as driving mirror, anti
● A convex mirror or a diverging mirror is used as driving mirror, anti theft
mirror in malls and street lamp reflector.
FACTS TO REMEMBER
● The phenomenon, due to which a ray of light deviates from its original
path, while traveling from one optical medium to another optical medium of
different density is called refraction.
● When a ray of light travels from optically rarer medium to optically denser
medium, it always bends towards normal, drawn at the point of incidence.
● Normal is the perpendicular drawn at the point of incidence on interface.
● When a ray of light travels from optically denser medium (glass or water)
to optically rarer medium (air or vaccum), it always bends away from the
normal, drawn at the point of incidence.
● When an incident ray strikes at right angles at the point of incidence, it
suffers no refraction.
● The perpendicular shift in the path of incident ray,while emerging out from
an optical slab is called lateral displacement.
● Because of refraction :
(i) A stick appears bent and short when immersed obliquely in water. It also
appears magnified because image is formed close to the eye.



(ii) The bottom of a beaker filled with water appears raised.
Swimming pool appears shallow when filled with water.
(iii) Stars twinkle and appear higher in horizon than their actual positon.
(iv) The Sun appears bigger during sunset or sunrise. Atmospheric refraction
is responsible for twilight and helps in increasing the length of the day by
four minutes, difference between real and apparent day length.
●  The phenomenon due to which a ray of light, while traveling from
optically denser medium to optically rarer medium, gets reflected into the
same medium at the surface of separation, is called total internal reflection
(TIR).
● For total internal reflection to take place :
(i) rays of light must travel form optically denser medium to optically rarer
medium, (ii) the angle of incidence in optically denser medium, must be
greater than critical angle.
● Angle of incidence in a denser medium for which angle of refraction in
rarer medium is 90° is called Critical Angle.
●  Sparkling of diamonds and formation of mirage take place due to total
internal reflection. It is also used in optical fibres for endoscopy or in
communication.
LENSES
● A concave lens can be used as :
(i) eye lens for Gallelio telescope, and
(ii) correcting short sightedness.
● A convex lens always forms real and inverted images, except it forms a
virtual magnified and erect image, when object is between optical centre and
principal focus. It's when, it is used as magnifying lens.

● Image formation by convex lens :
Position of object Position of size of image Nature of image

At focus At infinity and highly Real and inverted
enlarged



Between focus and optical Enlarged but on same Virtual and erect
centre side of object
Between (f) and 2f i.e. Enlarged magnified Real and inverted
centre of curvature (c) beyond 2f
At 2f Same size as object at 2f Real and inverted

only
Beyond 2f Diminished and between Real and inverted

f and 2f
 
● A convex lens can be used as :
(i) burning glass, (ii) objective lens for telescopes, (iii) erecting lens, (iv)
objective lens for photogaphic camera, cinema projector, search light, (v) as a
simple microscope and, (vi) for correcting long sightedness.
● A concave lens always forms virtual, erect and diminished image.
● The power of lens is the measure of convergence or divergence produced
by it and is measured in dioptres (D).
● If ‘f’ is the focal length in metres and ‘p’ is the power, then
● If two or more than two lenses of power P1, P2 etc., are placed in contact
with each other, then power ‘P’ of the combination is : P = P1 + P2 + .....
algebraic sum
HUMAN EYE
● In human eye, cornea, acts as window to the world, i.e., allows the light to
enter the eye. It causes maximum refraction of light entering into an eye.
● In human eye, choroid darkens the eye from inside and hence prevents any
internal reflection.
●  The function of retina consisting of rod and cone cells is to receive the
optical image of an object and then convert it into optical pulses which are
finally sent to brain through optic nerve.
● Ciliary muscles alter the focal length of crystalline lens, so that images of
objects at various distances are clearly focused on retina. The property of eye
lens to focus image on retina is called power of accomodation.
● Iris of the eye controls the amount of light entering into the eye. It acts like
the adjustable diaphragm of the camera. It imparts colour to eye because of
pigment present in it.



● Blind spot is the area on retina from where optic nerve originates and leave
the eye. No image is formed if focused on it and the person behave as blind
person.
● Eye-lids of human eye act as the shutter in front of camera to restrict light.
EYE DEFECTS
●  The common principal causes of eye defects are myopia and
hypermetropia.

Myopia Hypermetropia
Short sightedness Long sightedness
Able to see nearby objects but Able to see distantly placed objects
not distant object clearly than nearby objects
Image is formed in front of retina Image is formed behind retina
Focal length of eye lens increases Focal length of eye lens decreases
Corrected by concave lens Corrected by convex lens
 
● The other eye defects include old age hypermetropia also called presbyopia
and astigmatism caused by roughening of cornea hence, corrected by
cylindrical lenses.
● A convex lens of short focal length is used as magnifying glass or simple
microscope.
● A compound microscope uses lens of short aperture and small focal length
as objective lens and other lens of short focal length but large aperture as eye
piece lens.

Ray diagram for the formation of image by a compound microscope
● An astronomical telescope uses objective lens of large aperture and large
focal length and eye-piece of small aperture and small focal length.



Astronomial telescope
● A binocular consists of a pair of astronomical telescope whose tube length
is reduced using prism.
●  Interference of light is the phenomenon of non-uniform distribution of
energy in a medium because of superposition of two light waves from a
coherent source placed closed to each other. It is explained by Young's
Double Slit experiment.
● Diffraction is the bending of light round the sharp corners before spreading
into the region provided that the size of hole is comparable to wave length of
light. The observation of a coloured spectrum of light when watching across
a muslin cloth is because of diffraction.
● Polarisation of light refers to the restriction of the vibrations of light in one
plane. It is obtained by passing light through Nicol’s prism or tourmaline
crystal.
Polaroids are used in making good sun glasses than coloured glasses, shields
of automobiles, and window panes of a train or airplane.
●  The ordinary light from a source is transverse unpolarised light that is
polarised by polarizer.
SOUND AND WAVE MOTION
●  Sound is longitudinal wave and requires a material medium for
transmission and propagation.
● A transverse wave is one in which the motion of the individual particles of
the medium takes place at right angles to the direction of propagation of the
wave.
● Transverse waves can be generated in solids and liquids but not in gases.
● A longitudinal wave is the one in which the motion of individual particles
of the medium takes place in the direction of propagation of the wave,
resulting in the formation of alternate compressions and rarefactions.
● Longitudinal waves can be produced in solids, liquids and gases.
● Light waves are transverse in nature, while sound waves are longitudinal
waves.



● The speed of sound is independent of loudness, provided the amplitude is
not very large.
● The velocity of sound is independent of pressure.
● Sound travels faster in warm air.
● The velocity of sound increases if the wind is blowing in the direction of
sound wave propagation and vice-versa.
● Sounds of all frequencies travel with the same speed.
● Speed of sound is more in water than in air and still more in solids like
steel.
● The phenomenon due to which repetition of sound is heard, after reflection
from distant object (such as high building or hillock), after the original sound
from a given source dies off is called ‘Echo’.
● SONAR, sound navigation and ranging is based on reflection of sound that
causes echo.
●  These days reflection of sound (ultrasound) technique is widely used in
medical sciences to diagnose the presence of tumour or health of foetus in a
mother or presence of a stone in a body organ.
●  Resonance is defined as a phenomenon when the frequency of applied
external force is equal to the natural frequency of the body on which force is
applied, such that it readily takes up the vibrations and begins to vibrate with
an increased amplitude.
●  Pitch is the characteristic of musical sound, which enables us to
differentiate between two sounds of equal loudness, coming with different
frequencies from two sources.
● The higher the freqeuncy of a note, the higher is its pitch or the shriller is
its note. Among humans, pitch of a female's sound is higher than that of a
male member.
● Waves and frequencies : Audible range 20Hz – 20,000 Hz, generated by
vibrating bodies such as vocal cords. Audiblic to human. At NTP,
wavelength range-16.5 m to 1.65 cm.
●  Infrasonic range : Frequency below 20Hz, produced by earth quakes.
volcanic eruptions or ocean waves. Mostly longtitudinal mechanical waves.
●  Ultrasonic range : Above 20,000 KHz, longituduinal mechanical waves,
produced by high frequency quartz crystals, fishes, mosquitos bats. Used for
navigation (SONAR) or bloodless surgery and wave theraphy
● Velocity of sound : Vsteel > Vneter > Vair.
with increase in temperature of air, velocity of sound also increases.



● RADAR : System of locating distant objects by means of the reflected
radio waves usually of micro wave frequency.
● The rate of flow of sound energy per unit is called intensity of sound. The
rate of flow of sound energy per unit area and its effect on the ear
collectively is called loudness of sound.
● Light waves are transverse electromagnetic waves.
● Radio waves, television waves, microwaves, infra–red rays, visible light,
ultra–violet rays, x-rays and gamma rays are major parts of electromagnetic
spectrum in the order of decreasing wavelength or increasing frequency.
●  Radio waves, TV-waves and micro-waves are produced by oscillating
circuits in special vacuum tubes.
● Infra-red rays, visible radiation and ultra-violet rays are produced by the
excitation of outer electronic shell in increasing order.
● X-rays are produced by the excitation of inner electrons of an atom and
sudden destruction of high energy free electrons.
● Gamma radiation are produced by the nucleus of an atom, by the sudden
destructions of high energy particles. They find use in the cure of cancer like
the one released by Co-60.


###CHEMISTRY###

Chemistry is the branch of science concerned with the composition,
properties, characteristics and reactions of substances along with energy
changes. Inorganic Chemistry is associated with the properties of
compounds of the chemical elements contained in minerals.
Organic Chemistry is concerned with the compounds of carbon and
hydrogen or their derivatives.
STATES OF MATTER
● Anything that occupies space and has mass or weight is called Matter.
●  Matter undergoes changes which may be either chemical changes or
physical changes.
● All matters exist in one of the three physical forms or states: solid, liquid
and gas.
● The three states of matter are interconvertible.
KINETIC THEORY OF MATTER
●  All forms of matter is composed of small particles (molecules, atoms,
ions).



● The particles are in continuous, never-ending motion (Brownian motion).
The higher the temperature, the faster is the motion, as thermal energy is
converted into kinetic energy.
● The particles attract one another with a force (intermolecular force) which
decreases with the increasing distance between them.
CHARACTERISTICS OF MATTER
●  In a solid, the particles are packed closely together, so, inter-particle
attractive force is very high.
● Inter–particle force is weak in liquids, so they are able to flow and occupy
shape of container.
●  Inter-particle force is negligible in gases. So their particles are able to
wander about more freely than those of liquids or solids.
● Their free random motion is called Brownian motion.
CHANGES IN STATES OF MATTER
●  Heating increases the kinetic energy and consequently motion of the
particles and the rigid structure of the solid is lost.
● Further heating leads to escaping of the particles from the surface.
●  When heat is removed from a gas (vapour) the kinetic energy of the
particles is reduced and they become slower and thus come nearer.
●  This leads to increase in inter-particle attractive forces and thus
condensation and finally freezing takes place.
● Sublimation occurs, where the attractive forces between the particles are
low. It involves change of a solid directly into gas on heating without
undergoing liquid state or vice versa.
CLASSIFICATION OF MATTER
ELEMENTS
●  An element is a pure substance that is composed of only one kind of
atoms.
●  An element cannot be composed from or decomposed into simpler
substance by a physical or chemical change.
Examples : Aluminium (Al), Hydrogen (H), Iron (Fe) etc.
● Metals are characterised by :
● Metallic Lustre
● Good thermal and electrical conductivity
● Ductility (can be drawn into wires) e.g. copper, gold



● Malleability (can be beaten into sheets) e.g.–Iron, Aluminium
● Gold is most ductile and malleable hence used in making ornaments.
● Non-metals are characterised by absence of above properties. e.g. Oxygen,
Chlorine etc.
● Metalloids are elements which exhibit properties midway between those of
metals and non-metals, e.g., Arsenic, Antimony.
● Except Mercury, all metals are solid at ordinary temperatures.
●  Except Bromine, all non-metals are gases or solids under ordinary
conditions.
● Percentage of different elements in human body.
Oxygen – 65%, Carbon – 18 %, Hydrogen – 10 %, Nitrogen – 3 %, others –
4 %
COMPOUNDS
● Compound is a pure substance that is composed of two or more elements
chemically combined in definite and constant proportions. e.g. water (H2O),
Sodium Chloride (NaCl) etc.
● The separation of a compound into its constituent elements by chemical
means is called analysis a part of analytical chemistry.
● The formation of a compound by the union of elements is called synthesis.
●  Silicon dioxide (SiO2) is the most commonly found compound on the
earth crust in lithosphere while oxygen is the most commonly found element
on earth.
● The total number of different elements present in a molecule of compound
is called its atomicity such as its 2 for NaCl and 7 for H2SO4.

MIXTURES :
● A given mixture can be a solution, colloid or suspension. The three are
different in their behaviour as listed below in table.
TYPES OF COLLOIDS

 Dispersed phase Dispersion medium Example

1. Solid Solid Solid sol., minerals and
rocks, gems

2. Solid Liquid Sol, gold sol., sulphur



sol.
3. Solid Gas Aerosol, smoke
4. Liquid Liquid Emulsion, milk
5. Liquid Solid Gel, cheese, jellies
6. Liquid Gas Liquid aerosol, cloud
7. Gas Liquid Foam, froth in air
8. Gas Solid Solid foam, pumic stone
Dispersion medium and solution type

Dispersion medium Type of solution
Water Hydrosol
Alcohol Alcosol.
Air Aerosol.
Organic solvent Organosol.

SOLUTIONS, SOLUTE AND SOLVENT
● A solution is a homogenous mixture of two or more substances.
● The substance which is dissolved to make a solution is called solute and
the liquid in which solute is dissolved is known as solvent.
● The true solutions are always homogenous and the size of solute particles

is less than 10–7 cm.
●  In a true solution, the solute particles cannot be distinguished from the
solvent molecules even by using a microscope.
● A colloid is a kind of solution in which the size of solute particles is bigger
than that of a true solution but smaller than those of a suspension.
●  Milk, Blood, Ink, Soap solution, Gum, Jelly are example of colloidal
solutions.
● The scattering of light by colloidal particles is called Tyndall effect.
● Strength of a solution : It is defined as the amount of the solute in grams

found dissolved in one litre (or dm3) of solution. It is expressed in g/litre or

g/dm3.



● Molarity : For a solution, it is defined as number of moles of the solute

dissolved per litre (or dm3) of solution. It is denoted by M:
MIXTURES
●  A mixture is matter composed of two or more substances (elements,
compounds or both) in variable proportions in which each of its components
still exhibit its own characteristics properties.
● Mixtures can be heterogeneous i.e. non uniform, or homogeneous, i.e. the
same throughout.
● Homogeneous mixtures have the same composition throughout the sample
e.g. salt solution.
● Heterogeneous mixture consists of two or more parts which have different
compositions. e.g. mixture of iron and sulphur.
Separation of a pure substance : A substance known for its specific properties
such as boiling point, melting point, density, refractive index, etc is called a
pure substance.
● From a given mixture, a pure substance can be separated depending upon
the property of the substance or of the present impurity.
There are different methods known and adopted to separate a pure substance
from a given mixture such as filtration, crystallization, sedimentation
followed by decantation, distillation provided that the difference between the
two liquids is minimum of 25°C, fractional distillation, chromatography,
sublimation, centrifugation, etc. of these processes:
● evaporation and crystalization is used to obtain salt from sea water.
●  fractional distillation is used to separate different fractions of petroleum
such as gasoline, diesel, kerosene oil etc. from crude oil.
● centrifugation of millk is used to separate cream from raw millk.
●  sublimation is done to separate substance such as camphor which
sublimate on heating.
● filtration is used to separate insoluble substances from a mixture.
●  gravity separation wing separating funnel is used to separate two
immiscible liquids such as oil and water.
● reverse osmosis to separate potable water from marine water.
PROPERTIES OF GASES AND GAS LAWS
Kinetic-Molecular theory of Gases



● Gases consist of molecules widely separated in space. The total volume of
the molecules is negligible compared to the volume of the gas as a whole. It
occupies both the shape and volume of container.
Boyle’s Law
● The volume (V) of a given mass of a dry gas is inversely proportional to
the pressure (P), if the temperature remains constant i.e., or, P1V1 = P2V2
Charle’s Law
● At constant pressure, the volume
(V) of given mass of gas is directly proportional to the absolute (Kelvin)
temperature (T) i.e., V ∝ T.
● Ideal Gas Equation : PV/T = Constant
● Charles law explains that gases expand on heating. Therefore, the mass of
gas sample is constant, the larger volume of gas at high temperature has less
mass per unit volume i.e., lower density.
● Hence, hot air is less dense than cool air. This allows hot air balloons to be
used for meteorological purposes or transportation. They rise up in cool air
or humid air rise up in atmosphere.
Ideal gas :
● A gas that obeys Boyle’s law, Charle’s law and Avogardo’s law strictly is
called an ideal gas.
Combined gas law states that P1V1 = P2V2 or
= Hence, gas equation is PV = nRT where R represents work done per degree
per mol or energy per degree per mole. Numerically it is equal to 0.0821 L

atm K–1m–1.
●  Dalton’s law of partial pressure : It states that the pressure of a
homogenous mixture of gases like air is equal to the sum of the partial
pressure of individual gas present.
P = P1 + P2 + P3 ..... .
● Non-ideal gas : It is also called real gas and does not follow all general gas
equations at all temperatures and pressure.
● Diffusion : It refers to the movement of fluid particles i.e., liquid or gas
from the region of high concentration to the region of low concentration.
● Osmosis is special type of diffusion that involves the movement of solvent
particles only across a membrane from hypotonic solution to by hypertonic



solution.
ATOMIC STRUCTURE
●  An atom consists of a small positively charged heavy nucleus with
negatively charged light electrons revolving around the nucleus in circular
orbits. (Rutherford Atomic Model)
● The nucleus contains protons and neutrons, called nucleons.
● Proton is a positively charged particle having an absolute charge of 1.6

×10-19 coulomb and mass of 1.672 × 10–27kg.
● Electron is a negatively charged particle having an absolute charge of –1.6

× 10–19 coulomb and mass of 9.109 × 10–31kg.

●  Neutron is an uncharged or neutral particle with mass of 1.674 × 10–
27kg.
Symbols of some Important Particles
Particle Symbol Atomic No. Mass No.

Particle Atomic No. Mass No.
Alpha (a) particle 2 4
Beta(P) particle -1 0
Proton 1 1
Neutron 0 1
Gamma ray (y) 0 0
Deutron 1 2
Positron 1 0
Neutrino 0 0

FACTS TO REMEMBER
● J.J. Thomson discovered electron in cathode ray discharge tube. The ratio
of charge to mass i.e. e/m is same for all cathode rays irrespective of gas used
in discharge tube.
● Goldstein used the discharge tube and anode rays consisting of proton.
He described them to be located in the nucleus of atom.



●  Presence of newtrons as neutron sup-atomic particle in mucleus was
discovered and proposed by Chadwick.
●  The set of four quantum numbers are Principal quantum number (n),
Azimuthal quantum number (l, l = 0, 1, 2, 3, ... (n –1), Magnetic quantum
number (m, n = 1, 0, + 1...) and Spin quantum number with value +1/2 or –
1/2.
● Nucleus, consisting of protons and neutrons accounts for almost the whole
mass of the atom.
● Extra-nuclear part is occupied by electrons orbiting in fixed energy levels.
● Having equal number of protons and electorns, atom as a whole is neutral.
● Mass number (A) is the number of protons plus the number of neutrons in
the nucleus, also called atomic mass.
●  Atomic number (Z) is a number equal to the number of protons in the
nucleus.
● Electronic configuration describes the manner in which electrons arrange
themselves in the various orbits based on the relation 2n2 where ‘n’ is the
number of shell. However, the last and second last shell cannot have more
than eight electrons.

Mole : It refers to a group of 6.023 × 1023 particles, atoms or molecules of
an element or compound respectively.
No. of moles of element = Mass of element Gram atomic mass of element
No. of moles of compound = Molecular mass in grams Gram atomic mass of
compound Mass of an atom of an element = Gram atomic mass 6.023×1023

SOME PRINCIPLES
●  Heisenberg’s uncertainly principle : It is not possible to determine
simultaneously the position and the momentum of a body to an arbitrary
accuracy.
● Pauli’s exclusion principle : No two electrons in an atom can have the
same set of 4 quantum numbers.
● Hund’s rule : Pairing of electrons in degenerate orbitals belonging to a
particular sub-shell does not take place till each orbital is occupied by a
single electron with parallel spin.
● Aufbau’s principle : In the ground state of an atom, electron enters the
orbital of lowest energy first. Any subsequent electrons are filled in order of



increasing energies. For multi-electron atoms, the sequence observed is 1s,
2s, 2p, 3s, 3p, 4s, 3d, 4p, 5s, 5d ....
ISOTOPES
● Isotopes are atoms of the same element having the same atomic number,
but different atomic weights or mass numbers. e.g. Protium (1H1),
Deuterium (1H2), Tritium (1H3) are isotopes of hydrogen, C12 and C14
are isotopes of carbon.
ISOBARS
● Isobars are atoms of two elements having the same mass number, though
different atomic number, e.g. both Argon (Ar) and Calcium (Ca) have mass
number = 40, C-14 and Nitrogen have mass number = 14 but they have
different atomic number.
ISOTONES
● Isotones are atoms with different atomic number and mass number, but
having same number of neutrons
●  Isoelectronic species : These are chemical species which have same
numbers of electrons such as (O and NO2+ each have sum of 20 electrons.
● Isodiaphers : In nuclear physics, isodiaphers refers to nuclides which have
different atomic numbers and mass numbers but the same number of excess
neutrons i.e., difference in number of neutrons and protons e.g. 90th 234 and
92nd 238, with = 54.
● Isosters : These are molecules or ions with same number of atoms and
same number of atoms and same number of valence electrons e.g. hydrogen
ion and fluoride ions, sodium and hydrogen cations on O2 and N2O.

PERIODIC TABLE OF ELEMENTS
● Periodic table is the arrangement of elements according to some recurring
property.
●  Total number of known elements is 114, of which 92 are naturally
occurring elements and others are artificially prepared in laboratories called
transuranic elements.
●  Mendeleev’s periodic table, based upon Atomic Weights was the first
really successful arrangements of elements.



● Modern periodic table or the extended form or long form of the periodic
table proposed by Moseley is based upon Atomic Number.
Groups
● Vertical columns of the table are called groups.
● Group-number is assigned to an element depending upon the number of
valence electrons (electrons in outer most valence shell) present in the atom
of the element.
●  There are 8 main and 18 vertical columns representing the various sub-
groups, out of these,
● 14 columns represent 14 subgroups of the first seven groups, ● 3 columns
for the elements of group VIII,
● 1 column for the zero group elements,
● Group 1 A: Alkali metals,
● Group II A: Alkaline earth metals,
● Group VII A : Halogens,
● Zero Group: Noble gases,
● All Group B elements: Transition metals, because their chemical properties
are between those of elements in Group II and Group III. These elements
such as mangnese, from copper, etc are known to show variable valency with
vacant d-orbital.
Periods
● Horizontal rows are called periods.
● There are 7 periods in the table, each beginning with an alkali metal on the
left and ending with a noble gas on the right [exception 1st and 7th period].
Ist period has two elements and 7th period has 29 element instead of 32
element.
Periodic Properties
●  Atomic radii is the distance between the centre of nucleus and the
outermost valency shell of the atom. It reduces moving across a period from
left to right i.e., element X in 2nd group of 2nd period has larger radii
compared to element Y in 7th group of the same period.
● Ionisation (energy) potential is the amount of energy required to remove
one or more electrons from the valency shell of an isolated gaseous atom. It
is expressed in KJ mol–1. Always Ist ionisation is less than 2nd ionisation
energy because of increased electrostatic force.



● Electron Affinity is the amount of energy released on adding one or more
electrons to the valence shell of an isolated gaseous atom. I.E1 < I.E2 <
I.E3
● Electronegativity is the tendency of an atom to attract electrons to itself
when combined in a compound. In a period, the electronegativity increases
across a period from left to right while in a group it decreases from top to
bottom. Fluorine is the most electronegative element and Cesium is the most
electropositive among all elements.
● An element is considered as a metal, if it loses electrons when supplied
with energy. When an element gains electrons, it is considered as non–metal.
Metallic character decreases across the period and non-metallic
Characteristic increases. Metal form basic oxides and non-metals form acidic
oxides.
CHEMICAL BONDING
Chemical bond is meant to help atom achieve the next gas electron
arrangement and become stable. An atom achieves this by forming bond with
other atoms of same element or atom belonging to different element.
The compound formed can be electrovalent or covalent that depends on type
of bonding involved incompound formation.
Electrovalent bond all strong bonds fomed between the cation and anion i.e.
atoms that can form cation and anion i.e. atoms that can form cation or anion
can only be involved in electrovalent bonding such as members of alkali
metals and halogens.
Covalent bond is formed between atoms of similar elements or those that do
not undergo ionisation to form cation or anion.
FACTS TO REMEMBER
● Chemical bonds are formed as a result of loss, gain or sharing of electrons
between the atom of reacting elements.
● Atoms tend to combine together to change from an unstable form with an
incomplete outer shell to a more stable form having complete shell.
● 2 electrons are present in the first and outer–most shell, e.g., Helium
● Or, 8 electrons in the outer–most shell, e.g., inert gases other than helium
and hydrogen.
● The linkage which actually holds the atoms together within the molecule is
called a chemical bond.



● Cation is the positively charged particle formed by loss of an electron or

more. e.g. Na+, Mg2+, Ca2+, etc
● Anion is the negatively charged particle formed by gain of an electron or

more. e.g. Cl–, O2–, etc.
● Valence electrons is the number of electrons present in the outermost shell
of an atom.
● Valency of an element is the number of electrons lost, gained or shared by
one atom of the element during the course of chemical bonding.
●  Electropositive nature is the tendency of an atom to lose electrons and
form cations. e.g. Metals like sodium, potassium etc.
● Electro negative nature is the tendency of an atom to gain electrons and
become anion e.g. Non-metals like hydrogen, chlorine etc.,
● Electrovalent or ionic bond is the bond formed by transfer of one or more
electrons, from the atom of an electropositive element to the atom of an
electronegative element, e.g., NaCl, MgCl2,CaO.
● Covalent bond is the chemical bond formed between two combining atoms
by mutual sharing of one or more electrons of atoms of non–metallic
element, e.g. H2O, NH3, H2, N2 AlCl3, etc.
● A bond is polar, if the charge is unevenly spread over the bond like in
water molecule and non-Polar, if charge is evenly spread.
● Coordinate bond is a type of covalent bond in which only one of the atoms
contributes both the electrons of the shared electron pair, e.g. H2SO4,NH3.
●  Hydrogen bond is an electrostatic force between covalently bonded
hydrogen atom of one molecule and an electronegative atom (such as,
Fluorine (F), Oxygen (O), Nitrogen (N) of another molecule)
● Hydrogen bond is responsible for exceptionally high melting and boiling
points of water (H2O), Ammonia (NH3) and Hydrogen fluoride (HF).
● Van der Waal’s bond is the force of attraction between neighbouring atoms
because of their different dipoles induced by instantaneous unsymmetrical
distribution of electrons in the atom. It is responsible for condensation of
inert elements, and gases, like H2,N2,O2, methane etc.
●  Metallic bond is the attractive force between mobile electrons and the
metallic Kernels, e.g. Gold, Silver, Copper etc.



● In isoelectronic series the ions of different elements have same number of
electrons but differ from one another in magnitude of nuclear charge.

Such as N3–, O2–, F–, Na+, Mg2+. These all have 10 electrons.
CHEMICAL REACTION AND CHEMICAL EQUATION
● A chemical change is also termed as a chemical reaction.
● In combination reaction, a single or more new substance is/are formed by
the union of two or more substances.
●  In decomposition reaction, a substance breaks up into smaller, simpler
substances.
●  In displacement reaction, one element displaces another element from a
compound.
1. Precipitation reaction is a reaction in which two compounds in their
aqueous state react to form an insoluble residue, called precipitate.
2. Neutralisation reaction is a reaction in which a acid and base react and
exchange their radicals to form salt and water.
● In redox reactions oxidation and reduction take place simultaneously.
● Oxidation is the process in which a substance loses electrons.
● Oxidation is also described as a process involving addition of oxygen, or
removal of hydrogen.
Such as aerobic respiration, combustion of methane, etc.
● Reduction is the process involving gain of electrons. Such as formation of
ammonia in Haber’s process.
●  Reduction is also identified with removal of oxygen, or addition of
hydrogen.
● Oxidising agent is a substance that brings about oxidation, e.g.; Oxygen,
Chlorine, concentrated Sulphuric acid, concentrated and dilute Nitric acid.
● Reducing agent is a substance that brings about reduction e.g.; Hydrogen,
carbon monoxide, Carbon, Ammonia, Coke, Charcoal, Hydrogen sulphide
and Sulphur oxides.
● Endothermic reaction: Heat is absorbed such as neutralization reactions.
● In a electrochemical cell, oxidation take place at anode and reduction at
cathode.
●  Photochemical reaction : Light is required for such reactions such as
photosynthesis and photography changes.
● Chemiluminiscent reaction :
Electricity is required for chemical reaction.



● Electrochemical reaction : Electricity is produced in chemical reaction.
● Nickel and chromium plating is done to prevent steel articles from rusting.
● Gold and silver plating is done on iron or brass objects to improve their
appearance.
● Electro-refining of metals is a process by which impurities from metals are
extracted by chemical processes and are removed electrolytically to obtain a
highly pure metal. In the process pure metal is taken as cathode and impure
metal as anode immersed in an electrolytic solution.
● Metals generally refined by this process are:
1. Zinc 2. Silver 3. Nickel
4. Lead 5. Copper 6. Aluminium
● Electrometallurgy is the extraction of metals from its ores by electrolysis
such as sodium and aluminium from its ore called bauxite.
● Catalyst : It is a substance that cause a reaction to happen at a faster rate
or at low temperature without itself undergoing any chemical change during
course of reation.
ACIDS, BASES AND SALTS
●  Acids are substances, which produce hydronium ion(H3O+) in their
aqueous solution i.e., they are proton donor.
●  Oxy-acids essentially contain oxygen along with hydrogen and other
elements, e.g. H2SO4, HNO3, H2CO3, ● Bases are substances producing
hydroxyl ions in their aqueous solution i.e., they are proton acceptor.
● Oxides and hydroxides of metals (or metal like radicals) are called bases.
●  Alkali is a water-soluble base, e.g. sodium hydroxide and potassium
hydroxide.
● A weak acid remains weak even if it is concentrated because it produces a
low concentration of hydrogen ions.
●  A strong acid remains a strong acid even if it is diluted, because it
produces a high concentration of hydrogen ions.
● Acids generally have a sour taste, while bases have a bitter taste.
● Strong acids are corrosive and can burn through the skin.
● Bases are soapy to touch.
● Whenever an acid reacts with an alkali or base or vice versa, salt is formed
along with water. Salt formed can be acidic, basic or neutral depending on
nature of acids and bases.



SOME IMPORTANT USES OF ACIDS, BASES AND SALTS
Acids
● Sulphuric acid : King of chemicals is used in manufacture of fertilizers,
chemicals, explosives, paints, dyes, drugs and electrolytic cell like lead
storage battery.
●  Nitric acid : Used in manufacture of fertilizers, chemicals, explosives,
paints, dyes and drugs.
● Hydrochloric acid : Tanning and printing industry.
● Citric acid : In medicine (source of vitamin C), flavouring drinks.
● Boric acid : As an eye-wash, preservation of grains.
● Acetic acid : Flavouring food, food preservation (Vinegar).
● Benzoic acid : Food preservation (sodium benzoate).
● Carbonic acid : It lends ‘fizz’ to aerated drinks called fizzy drinks.
● Oxalic acid : In ink-stain removers.
●  Tartaric acid : Constituent of baking powder (reacts with the sodium
bicarbonate to release carbon dioxide that makes the dough, porous, light and
spongy).
Bases
● Sodium hydroxide : Manufacture of soap.
● Calcium hydroxide :
(i) Manufacture of bleaching powder, mortar, (ii) Softening of hard water,
(iii) Neutralising acid in the soil and in water supplies.
● Potassium hydroxide : Alkaline batteries.
●  Magnesium hydroxide : As an antacid to neutralise acidity caused by
excessive hydrochloric acid secretion in the stomach.
● Aluminium hydroxide : Foaming agent in fire extinguishers and as antacids.
● Ammonium hydroxide : Used to remove grease stains from clothes.
pH value/scale :
pH refers to the concentration of hydrogen ions in a solution as compared to
the hydroxide solution.
PH of Some Common Substances Substance

Soft drinks 2–4 Tears 7.4
Gastric juice 1–3 Sea water 8.5
Lemon 2.2–2.4 Urine (Human) 6
Vinegar 2.4—3.4 Saliva 6.5—7.5



Rain water 6.0 Blood (human)
7.3—7.4

Wine 2.8  
Salts
● Salts are ionic compounds containing a positive ion (cation) and a negative
ion (anion).
● A salt formed can be acidic, basic or neutral.
● Sodium chloride (NaCl) is a normal neutral salt.
●  Mohr’s salt [FeSO4(NH4)2, SO4.6H2O] and Alum
[K2SO4.Al2(SO4).3 24H2O] are double salt.
● Hydrolysis is a reaction in which a salt reacts with water to form a solution
which is either acidic or alkaline.
● Efflorescence is the property of salts to lose their water of crystallisation
and hence, are transformed into a powder at ordinary temperatures.
●  Deliquescence is the property of salts to absorb moisture at ordinary
temperatures to lose their crystalline form and form a saturated solution like
NaCl, anhydrous copper sulphate or cobalt chloride.
●  Hygroscopy is the property of salts to absorb atmospheric moisture at
ordinary temperature without dissolving in it.
ELECTROLYSIS
● Electrolysis is a chemical process by which a chemical substance, in its
fused state or in aqueous solutions, is decomposed by the passage of an
electric current, leading to the discharge of ions of the electrolyte at the two
electrodes, cathode and anode.
● Electrolyte is a compound which, in the fused state or in aqueous solution,
allows the passage of an electric current and is decomposed by it.
● Example of strong electrolytes :
1. Strong acids : Hydrochloric acid, nitric acid, sulphuric acid.
2. Strong bases : Sodium hydroxide, potassium hydroxide, barium hydroxide.
3. Salts : Lead bromide, sodium chloride, silver nitrate in aqueous state only.
● Examples of weak electrolytes :
1. Weak Acids : Acetic acid, carbonic acid, formic acid.
2. Weak bases : Ammonium hydroxide, magnesium hydroxide, copper
hydroxide.



3. Salts : Lead acetate, sodium carbonate.
●  Compounds, which in the fused state or in the aqueous solution do not
dissociate into ions are called non-electrolytes.
●  Examples : Distilled water, Acetone, Sugar solution, Petrol, Alcohol,
Benzene, Glycerol.
●  Electrodes are the two conducting poles of a metal or graphite, through
which electric current, i.e., electrons enter or leave an electrolyte in fused or
aqueous solution state.
1. Anode is the electrode connected to the positive terminal of the battery.
The current enters the electrolyte through the anode. At the anode the atom
loses electrons to form neutral cation.
2. Cathode is the electrode connected to the negative terminal of the battery.
The current leaves the electrolyte through the cathode. At the cathode, the
cation gains electrons to form neutral atoms.
● Electrolytic cell or voltameter is the complete set-up or vessel consisting of
electrodes and electrolytes, in which electrolysis takes place.
●  Corrosion : It is natural process that converts a refined metal into its
oxide, sulphide, etc causing the gradual destruction of metal or its gradual
wasting away.
● Steel : It is an alloy of iron having variable amounts of carbon, manganese
and other elements.

Type of steel Carbon Manganese
mild steel 0.05% 0.4%
medium carbon steel 0.30% 1%
High carbon steel 0.5 - 1.0% 0.3 - 0.9%
● Stainless steel : It is an alloy of iron with minimum 10.5 % chromium.
The other include nickel, molybdenum, titanium or copper.
● Prevention of corrosion : Any step adopted to avoid metal surface from
coming in contact of air and moisture prevents corrosin such as aling,
greasing, painting, galvanisation, using zink or electro plating.
Electro chemical cell :
It consist of a system that converts chemical energy into electrical energy. An
electro chemical cell can be primary or secondary. A cell is primary if it
cannot be reacharged like a dry cell of 1.5V but a secondary cell like lead
storage battery can be recharged.



● Microbial fuel cell : (MFC) It’s a device that converts chemical energy to
electrical energy by the action of micro-organisms. These cells use either bio
anode or bio cathode with a membrane to separate the compartments of
cathode and anode. The electrons produced during oxidation are transferred
to electrodes.
METALS AND NON-METALS
FACTS TO REMEMBER
● A metal is an electropositive element which is hard, sonorous, lustrous,
malleable, ductile with tensile strength, and a good conductor of heat and
electricity.
● Metals form basic or amphoteric oxides.
● A non-metal is an electronegative element which occurs as solids, liquids
and gases. They are generally poor conductors of heat and electricity.
● Non-metallic if solid are usually soft and brittle.
● Minerals are solid, naturally occurring as deposits in the earth’s crust, and
contain metals in the combined state, along with associated earthly impurties
(gangue).
● Ores are commercially viable minerals from which metal can be extracted
profitably. Therefore, all ores are minerals but all minerals cannot be ores.
●  Alloy is a homogenous mixture of two or more metals (or metal and
nonmetal) combined in a definite proportion in their molten state.
● Amalgam is an alloy in which one of the components is mercury.
● Mercury and gallium, despite being metals are liquids at room temperature.
● Vermilion is made from the mercury ore, Cinnabar (Mercury-sulphide).
● Gold and platinum occur exclusively in free state.
● Copper, mercury and silver occur partly in free state.
●  Most of the metals occur in the form of oxides, sulphides, carbonates,
sulphates, chlorides and silicates.
● Lithium is the lightest metal.
● Iridium has the highest density among metals.
● Liquation is used to concentrate metals having a low melting point, e.g.,
lead and tin.
●  Distillation is used to concentrate volatile metals like mercury and zinc
which contain non-volatile impurities.
●  Oxidation is used to concentrate metals containing volatile impurities,
which are easily oxidised e.g., Pig iron.



● A carbonate ore is converted into metal oxide by Calcination i.e. heating in
absence of air.
●  A sulphide ore is converted into metal oxide by roasting. i.e. heating in
presence of oxygen.
● The metal oxides are reduced to metal by carbon, aluminium or electrolytic
reduction.
● The refining of metals can be done by electrolysis, liquation, distillation or
oxidation methods.
● Forth Floatation process is used for the concentration of sulphide ores.
LIST OF COMMON ORES
1. Iron : Hematite (Fe2O3), Magnetite (Fe3O4), Ironphyrite (FeS2),
Siderite (FeCO3)
2. Aluminium : Bauxite (Al2O3.2H2O), Corrundum (Al2O3), Kryolite
(Na3AlF6)
3. Copper : Copper pyrite (CuFeS2), Copper glance (Cu2S)
4. Zinc : Zincblende (ZnS), Calamine (ZnCO3)
5. Potassium : Karnalite (KCl MgCl2 6H2O), Salt petre (KNO3)
6. Lead : Galena (PbS), Angelsite (PbCl2)
7. Tin : Tin pyrities (Cu2 FeSnS4), Cassiterite (SnO2)
8. Silver : Silver glance (Ag2S), Ruby Silver (3Ag2 S. Sb2 S3)
9. Gold : Calverite (Au Te2), Silvenites (AgAuTe2)
10. Mercury : Cinnabar (HgS), Caloment (Hg2Cl2)
11. Magnesium : Magnesite (MgCO3), Dolomite (MgCO3 CaCO3),
Epsom salt (MgSO4.7H2O), Kieserite (MgSO4. H2O)

IMPORTANT ALLOYS
Name % composition Uses

Brass Cu : 60% to 80% Rest Zn utensils and bullet
Bronze Cu: 75% to 90% Rest Sn utensils and statue



Phosphor Cu: 84.75% to 97.5% galvanometer
utensils

German silver Cu: 50% to Zn: 25%, Ni; 25% utensils
Al Bronze Cu: 80-90% to jwellery, golden

 Al: 7-12% Sn:0.5% paints, coins

Monel metal Cu: 30%, Ni: 65%, Re + Mn: 30% acid pump
Gun metal Cu: 87%, Sn: 10%, Zn: 3% in gun industries
Bell metal Cu: 80%, Sn: 20% in bells

COMPOUNDS OF SODIUM
The important compounds of sodium metal are Common Salt, Washing Soda
and Baking Soda.
(1) Common Salt (NaCl)
●  Common salt is sodium chloride, NaCl. It is a colourless crystalline
substance which is highly soluble in water. It is hygroscopic due to the
presence of small amount of magnesium chloride. It is used in flavouring
food and in food preservation.
(2) Washing Soda (Sodium Carbonate)
● Chemically, washing soda is a carbonate of sodium metal. It is actually
sodium carbonate decahydrate, Na2CO3. 10H2O. It is used to remove
hardness of water and in cleaning of fabrics.
(3) Baking soda (NaHCO3)
● Its chemical name is sodium bicarbonate or sodium hydrogen carbonate. It
is used in water fire extinguisher and as baking powder in cooking. Baking
powder is mixture of sodium bicarbonate and tartaric acid.
Glass
It is super cooled liquid formed from, sand, lime stone, soda ash and cullet
(broken pieces of glass). The mixture is heated in regenerative furnace.
The glass produced is called soda glass. The commercially produced glass is
borosilicate. In borosilicate glass soda is replaced with boron oxide. The
glass commercially used is imparted different colour for different reason.
Bullet Proof Glass
It is the glass that provides the protection against the fire or bullet. It is made
of poly carbonate, thermoplastic and laminated glass.



Glass is also considered as super cooled liquid. It is considered as highly
viscous substance.
COMPOUNDS OF CALCIUM
(1) Lime (Calcium Oxide, CaO)
● Chemically lime is calcium oxide and its formula is CaO. It is also called as
Quick Lime. It is prepared by heating limestone to a temperature of 800°C to
1000°C in a lime kiln.
● Its melting point is very high being 2600°C.
Use of Lime
(1) Calcium oxide (lime) is used in the manufacture of cement and glass.
(2) Calcium oxide (lime) is used for drying gases and alcohol.
(3) Calcium oxide (lime) is used as a basic lining in furnaces.
(4) Calcium oxide (lime) is used in the preparation of calcium carbide, basic
calcium nitrate, and calcium bisulphite.
(5) It is used in slaking of lime i.e. formation of calcium hydroxide.
Uses of Calcium Hydroxide (Slaked Lime)
(1) A solution of calcium hydroxide (slaked lime) in water called lime-water
is used for testing carbon dioxide and sulphur dioxide gas in chemistry
laboratories. With carbon dioxide white ppt. formation is temporary but
permanent with sulphur dioxide.
● Hard and soft water : Water obtained from natural water reservoirs such
as wells, bore holes, rivers etc. is hardwater being rich in the chloride and
sulphate salts of calcium and magnesium. Although good for health, it’s not
good for laundry purposes. It does not form lather with soap and when boiled
leaves scale of salt deposits. It is denser than soft water.
(2) Bleaching Powder
● Chemically, bleaching powder is calcium oxychloride.
●  Its formula is CaOCl2, Ca(OH)2 + Cl2 → CaOCl2 + H2O It is
produced by passing chlorine gas over dry slaked lime. It is soluble in cold
water. It is a yellowish white powder which gives a strong smell of chlorine if
left exposed to air.
Uses of Bleaching Powder
(1) Bleaching powder is commonly used for bleaching washed clothes in
laundry (laundry is a place where clothes are washed and pressed).
(2) Bleaching powder is used for bleaching cotton and linen in textile
industry and for bleaching wood pulp in paper industry.



(3) Bleaching powder is used for disinfecting drinking water supply, i.e. for
making drinking water free from germs (chlorination).
(4) Bleaching powder is used for the manufacture of chloroform (CHCl3).
(5) Bleaching powder is used for making wool unshrinkable.
(6) Bleaching powder is used as an oxidising agent in many chemical
industries.
(3) Plaster of Paris
● Chemically it is calcium sulphate hemihydrate.
● Its formula is (CaSO4)2. H2O. or CaSO4 1/2 .H2O It is prepared from
gypsum.
● Gypsum is calcium sulphate dihydrate, CaSO4. 2H2O.
● When Gypsum is heated to a temperature of 100°C, it loses threefourths of
its water of crystallisation and forms Plaster of Paris. If heated at higher
temperature, it produces dead plaster.
● Plaster of Paris is a white powder. It sets into a hard mass on wetting with
water.
Uses of Plaster of Paris
(1) Plaster of Paris is used in hospitals for setting fractured bones in the right
position to ensure correct healing. It keeps the fractured bone straight. This
use is based on the fact that when Plaster of Paris is mixed with water and
applied around the fractured limbs, it sets into a hard mass. In this way, it
keeps the bone joints or fractured bone in a fixed position.
(2) Plaster of Paris is used in chemistry laboratories for sealing the airgaps in
apparatus where air-tight arrangement is required.
(3) Plaster of Paris is used in making castings for statues, cheap ornaments,
toys and decorative materials.
(4) Plaster of Paris is used as a fire-proofing material.
(5) Plaster of Paris is used in making black-board chalk.
Allotropy
It is the property in which an element exhibit itself in two or more than two
physical forms like carbon, sulphur and phosphorous. Carbon exists in
allotropic form of graphite, diamond, carbon black, charcoal i.e., wood/
animal charcoal and fullerenes with minimum of C-60. Phosphorous exists in
form of white and red phosphorous. Stored in water because of its high
reactivity and low ignition temperature. It is used in match box industry in
making match sticks. Wood charcoal is used as fuel for absorption of gases in



gas masks. Animal charcoal is used to remove pigment during filtration of
molasses in the sugar industries.
ELEMENTS AND THEIR OCCURRENCE IN EARTH
●  Earth is a rich source of elements, found either in native state or in
compound form.
● The solid phase of the earth is called the lithosphere.
● Percentage distribution of elements in earth’s crust is as shown below :
● Ocean and seas, which form major component of hydrosphere, are again
vast reservoirs of elements.
● The major elements are Chlorine, Sodium, Magnesium, Sulphur, Calcium,
Potassium and Carbon in that order.
●  The minor elements are Bromine, Boron, Strontium, Silicon, Nitrogen,
Lithium, Aluminium and Rubidium.
● Four elements, Chlorine, Bromine, Sodium and Magnesium are recovered
commercially from sea water.
● The Manganese nodules found in the sea bed may form a potential source
of some of the less common metals.
● The gaseous phase of the earth is called atmosphere.
● The atmosphere mainly consists of nitrogen (78.09%), Oxygen (20.95%).
Argon (0.93) and other gases (<1%). These gases are obtained by fractional
distillation of air.
● Carbon dioxide forms about 0.04% of the atmosphere.
● Ozone exists mostly at the outer atmospheric level, where it helps in the
absorption of solar ultraviolet radiation. Therefore, ozone is considered as
chemical weed. On earth surface it is bluish toxic gas but in stratosphere, it is
useful in protecting earth from UV-rays.
● Examples of elements accumulated in living organisms are :
1. Iodine in sea weeds
2. Vanadium in sea cucumbers
3. Potassium in plant leaf
● Examples of elements concentrated in different parts of living beings are :
1. Iron (Fe-11) in blood
2. Zinc in the eyes of certain animals
3. Magnesium in chloroplast
4. Copper in mollscus have blue colour fluid (blood) because copperions.
FUELS



●  The materials which on combustion produce heat and light energy are
known as fuels.
● On the basis of their physical state fuels can be classified into solid fuels,
liquid fuels and gaseous fuels.
(i) Solid fuels : Coal, coke, wood, charcoal, nuclear fuels.
(ii) Liquid fuels : Petrol (Gasoline), diesel, kerosene, alcohol.
(iii) Gaseous fuels : Natural gas, coal gas, LPG, water gas, gobar gas
(Biogas), producer gas.
● The waste material of living objects like cattle dung and the dead parts of
living objects like plants, trees, is called Bio–mass.
●  Bio-mass contains carbon compounds and is the oldest source of heat
energy for domestic purposes.
●  Examles of Bio-mass being used as a fuel are, wood, cattle dung and
agricultural wastes like bagasse.
●  The destructive distillation of wood yields wood gas, charcoal, methyl
alcohol, acetic acid.
●  Bio-gas is a mixture of methane (65%), carbon-dioxide, hydrogen and
hydrogen sulphide.
● The major constituent of bio-gas is methane (65%).
● Bio-gas is obtained by the anaerobic fermentation of animal and vegetable
i.e., plant wastes in the absence of water. The decomposition is brought up by
methanogens, bacteria present in cow dung.
●  Khadi and Village Industries Commission (KUIC) is the major
organisation engaged in the promotion and construction of bio-gas plants.
● Coal is a complex mixture of compounds of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen.
●  Coal was formed by the carbonisation of large plants and trees buried
under the earth millions of year ago.
● Bituminous coal is used as fuel in our households, and in industry.
Type of Coal Carbon

Type of Coal Content Carbon
Peat 60%
Lignite 70%
Bituminous 80%
Anthracite 90%



● The destructive distillation of coal yields coal gas, ammoniacal liquor, coal
tar and coke.
● Coke is used as fuel with high calorific value and as the reducing agent in
reduction of metallic oxides to metal.
● Coal gas is a mixture of hydrogen, methane, and carbon monoxide.
● Water gas is a mixture of carbon monoxide and hydrogen.
● Producer gas is a mixture of carbon monoxide and nitrogen.
●  Crude oil was formed by the carbonisation of the remains of extremely
small plants and animals along with procaryotes like bacteria buried under
the sea millions of years ago in high temperature and pressure conditions.
● The refining of petroleum is done by the process of fractional distillation.
● D.D.T., B.H.C., Ethyl Alcohol, Benzene are important petrochemicals.
● Petroleum gas is a mixture of butane, propane and ethane.
● Petroleum gas liquefied under pressure is called Liquefied Petroleum Gas
(LPG).
● LPG consists mainly of butane and small amount of propane and ethane.
● Ethyl mercaptan is added to LPG to help in the detection of gas leakage.
●  Natural gas mainly consists of methane (CH4) and small quantities of
ethane and propane.
●  The process of breaking bigger hydrocarbon molecules into smaller
hydrocarbon molecules by heating in the presence of a catalyst is called
cracking and in absence of oxygen is called pyrolysis.
●  The amount of heat produced by burning a unit mass of the fuel
completely i.e., complete combustion of a gram of fuel is known as its
calorific value.
NOBLE GASES
● There are six noble gases : Helium, Neon, Argon, Krypton, Xenon and
Radon.
● Also called ‘rare gases’, as they are present in very small quantities in the
air.
● Radon is not present in air, it is the rarest of gases.
● Also called ‘inert gases’, as they do not enter into chemical reactions.
●  Helium is used for filling meteorological balloons and also used by sea
divers.
●  Neon is used in making advertising signs. It gives orange-red colour to
fluorescent tubes.



Common Organic Compounds
Common name Chemical name

Marsh gas Methane
Chloroform Trichloromethane
Methanol Methyl Alcohol
Ethanol Ethyl Alcohol
Vinegar Acetic acid
● Argon is used to create an inert atmosphere in chemical reactions and in
electric bulbs. It gives bluishgreen colour to flouorescent tubes.
● Krypton and Xenon are used in electrical valves and TV tubes and also in
lighthouses and miner’s lamp.
●  Xenon is know to react with fluorine or oxygen to form its respective
compound because of their very high electro negative and electropositive
nature.
CARBON AND COMPOUNDS
Carbon is the first element of the 14th group of periodic table with atomic
number six and valency four.
Carbon of its small size and tetravalency has strong tendency to form bonds
with other elements as well as with other carbon atom to form long chain
compounds. The property of carbon to form long straight or branched chain
compounds is called Catenation. Saturated hydrocarbons (Alkane)
Unsaturated hydrocarbons (Depending on number of unsatisfied valencies)
Hydrocarbons Alkene Alkyne
Saturated and Unsaturated hydrocarbons
Saturated hydrocarbons Unsaturated hydrocarbons
1. All the valancies of carbon are All the valancies of carbon are fully
satisfied therefore have not fully satisfied therefore have single covalent
bond. either double or triple covalent bond.
2. They burn with non-sooty flame. They burn with sooty flame.
3. They either do not react or if They react fastly with the bromine react then
very slowly with water to decolourize it.
bromine water to decolourize it.
The hydrocarbons based on valencies of carbon satisfied or not have
representative structural formula depending on number of carbon atoms



(n) present Alkene : CnH2n+2 e.g. CH4, C2H6, C4H10, etc.
Alkene : CnH2n e.g. C2H4, C4H8, C3H6, etc.
Alkyne : CnH2n–2 e.g. C2H2, C3H4, C4H6, etc.
Homologues series : It is a series of hydrocarbon in which all members
(called homologues) follow the same structural formula and every
succeeding differ from the adjacent by –CH2 group or 14 amu by mass. If
any functional group is present then all members have same functional
group.
Isomerism : It is a phenomenon in which a hydrocarbon exists having two or
more structural formula without undergoing any change in its molecular
formula.
When carbon bonds with hydrogen, it form the compounds called
hydrocarbons. The study of hydro carbons or their derivatives is called
organic chemistry.
Denaturation of alcohol : The alcohol consumed by people is ethanol while
methanol also called spirit if consumed leads to blindness and even death.
The ethanol is widely used organic solvent in industries. Hence, to prevent its
consumption by the workers at work, the alcohol used is denatured i.e. made
unfit for human consumption with addition of copper sulphate or pyridine. It
is a heavy, colourless, oily, explosive liquid produced as given above by
nitrating glycerol with white fuming nitric acid under controlled conditions.
TNT : Trinitro toulene (2, 4, 6-trinitro toulene), yellow colour solid with
explosive properties for use in military, industrial and mining operations.
On detonation, it decomposes as:
Dynamite : It is an explosive made of nitroglycerin. Alfred Nobel has
developed dynamite with the use of nitroglycerine as a blasting explosive by
mixing nitroglycerin with inert absorbent particularly, ‘ Icieslguhr’ or
diatomaceous earth and named the mixture dynamite.
RDX : It stands for Research Development Explosive. It is colourless soild
obtained by reacting white fuming nitric acid with hexamine.
Hexamine + Nitric acid RDX + dinitromethene + Ammonium nitrate +
water.
Uses of known organic compounds
1. Ethyl alcohol used as an organic solvent and in the alcohol thermometer as
thermometric fluid to measure low temperature.



2. In alcoholic drinks whisky – 35%, or more wine – 10 – 14%, beer – 4-6%
of ethyl alcohol.
3. Ethyl alcohol is used as an antifreeze in radiators of motor vehicles in cold
countries.
4. Formaldehyde (Methanal) in form of dilute solution is used as preservative
for Biological specimens.
5. Propanone (acetone) is used as nail polish remover, as a solvent and in
manufacture of chloroform and artificial leather and plastic called perspex.
6. Dilute solution of acetic acid (Ethanoic acid) 5% – 7% is vinegar used in
food preservation.
7. Acetic acid is also used in making of artificial fibre cellulose acetate and in
coagulation of rubber from latex obtained from rubber tree.
COMMONLY USED CHEMICALS AT HOUSEHOLD
● Iodized salt : Table salt with a percentage of iodine to prevent goitre.
● Shampoo : Hair care product used for removal of oils, dirt, skin particles,
dandruff and environmental pollutants.
● Soap : It is sodium or potassium salt of long chain fatty acids. It is prepared
by heating equal volume of fatty acid, NaOH and ethanol in water bath until
the paste formation.
● As mixture cools, saturated NaCl solution is added to remove glycerol and
NaOH (Sodium hydroxide).
● Detergent : A detergent is the sodium salt of sulphonic acid.
Soap forms lather only with soft water but detergent is effective in forming
rich lather of foam both in soft water and hard water.
● However, the use of detergents cause water pollution but not of soap.
●  Antiseptics : These are chemical used on living tissues and cells hence
commonly used as hand wash and in treatment of mouth and throat infection
with antibacterial and antifungal properties.
● Disinfectants : There are chemicals that cannot be used on living tissue or
cells. These can be oxidising or non-oxidising disinfectant.
● Oxidizing disinfectants include hydrogen peroxide and hypochlorite, non-
oxidising disinfectants include quaternary ammonium compound, fungicides
and amphoterics.
● Fire extinguishers : There are five types of them used for different fires A,
B, C, D and K.
A-type — Wood, paper, cloth and other ordinary materials.



B-type — Gasoline, oil, paints, etc.
C-type — Electrical fires D-type — Combustible metals.
K-type — Cooking media/ vegetable or animal oils or fats.
Beverages type percentage of alcohol and Source

Name Percentage Source
alcohol

Rum 45-55% Molasses (Cane Sugar)
Whisky 40-50% barley
Brandy 40-50 % grapes
Champagne 10-15% grapes
Beer 3-6% barley
Cider 2-6% apples
● Food additives : These are substances added to food to preserve flavour or
enlance taste and flavour. Such as pickling with vinegar, SO2 with fishes,
salting as with bacon, etc.
Vitamin-C and nitrogen → Antioxident Acids : Weak acids such as citric
acid, acetic acid, lactic acid,.
Anticalving agents : for keeping food in powder form like milk powder.
Colouring agent : such as annatto extract (yellow color), ...drated beets
(bluish-red to brown), beta-extract (red or green)
Artificial sweetness : These inchude sacchrimaspartame, suiralose,
advantame and stevia. They help in weight loss, check diabetes, dental care
and reactive hypoglycemia.
Polymerisation
It is the process of reacting monomer molecules together to form polymer
chain. A three dimensional network based on type of plastic formed by
polymerisation is thermoplastic or thermosetting plastic. Thermo plastics are
those that can be remoulded on heating like polyethylene, PVC (Polyvinyl
chloride), poly propylene, PET, etc. Thermo setting plastics are those which
cannot be remoulded after their heating such as bakelite, melanine, urea
formaldehyde etc.
Rubber
Natural rubber not effective for commercial use. It is polymer of isoprene (2-
methyl-1, 3-butadiene) extracted from latex collected from rubber tree.



For commercial use natural rubber is heated with sulphur in process called
the vulcanization to obtain vulcanized rubber. If isoprene is heated with
chlorine the result is chloroprene, fire resistant rubber. The other types of
rubber in use include :
● Styrene butadiene rubber (SRB) used for covering different hoses.
● Butadiene rubber (BR) mostly mixed with other rubber types to improve
elasticity, wear resistance and low temperature properties.
● Neoprene polymer of chloroprene which is fire resistant with high tensile
strength.
DIFFERENT TYPE OF POLYMERS WITH USES

Name Raw material Uses
Polyethylene Ethylene Insulating wires, making toys, flexible

pipes, bottle containers like cans for
storing liquid chemicals including
water.

Polypropylene Propylene Making carpet fibres, seat covers,
ropes, wraps for records and for
packaging.

Polystyrene Styrene Making toys, hot drinking cups, combs,
lining material for T.V. cabinet and
refrigerators.

Poly methyl Methyl Head transparent covering for the
methacrylate methacrylate unbreakable lights, protective coating,
(PMMA) or aeroplane windows.
Perpex
Teflon or Tetrafluro Making seal to withstand high
polytetra ethylene temperature and pressure, nonsticking
theroethylene surface of cooking vessels, insulation

of high frequency electric installation.
PVS (Poly Vinyl chloride Insulation of electric cables, rain coats,
vinyl chloride) table cloths, convey/or belts, etc.
Terylene Ethylene glycol Making magnetic recording tapes,

and terephthalic aprons for industrial workers, blend in



acid cloth etc.
Nylon-66 Adipic acid and Milk bristles of tooth brush, sheets,

Hexamethylene climbing ropes, socks, sweater and
diamines jersey.

Nylon-6 Cyclohexane and Tyre cords, ropes, fabrics.
Caprolactum

Bakelite O-hydroxymethyl Making of board, pens, formica table,
phenol and P- taps and electrical switches.
hydroxymethyl
phenol

Melamine Melamine and Making of unbreakable cups, glass
formaldehyde sheets and plates.

Dextron Glycodic acid Used as sutures after operation. These
lactic acid are self soluble in a week's time.

.
SCIENTISTS AND THEIR CONTRIBUTIONS
Neils Bohr : Atomic model
Burzelius : Catalysis H.
Becquerrel : Radioactivity
Bronsted-Lowry : Acid-Base concept
J. Chadwick : Discovery of neutron
de Broglie : Wave nature of electron
Faraday : Laws of electrolysis
Goldstein : Discovery of proton
Molecular orbital theory Heitlor-London : Valence bond theory
Madam Curie and : Artificial radioactivity
Mendeleef : Periodic table
Mosley : Modern periodic law and table
Planck : Wave nature of light
Rutherford : Discovery of nucleus, nuclear reactions
Roentzen : Discovery of X-rays Sorenson : pH and its scale
Thomson : Discovery of electron, photo electric effect
Tyndall : Light scattering by solute particles
NATURAL OCCURENCE OF SOME ACIDS



● Citric acid – Citrus fruits (lemon, orange)
● Lactic acid – Sour milk
● Uric acid – Urine
● Formic acid – Sting of bees and ants
● Butryic acid – Rancid butter
● Tartaric acid – Tamarind, grapes, apples
● Mallic acid – Apples
● Stearic acid – Fats
● Hydrochloric acid – Gastric juice
● Acetic acid – Vinegar
● Oxalic acid – Tomatoes

###BIOLOGY###

Biology is considered as a natural science concerned with the study of life
and living organism including their structure, function, growth, evolution,
distribution and environment. In general, it recognizes the cell as the basic
unit of life, genes as basic unit of heredity and evolution as the engine that
propels the creation of new species.
BIOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION
●  For easy understanding of biodiversity, earlier Greek Philosophers like
Aristotle, and his student Theophrastus have proposed two kingdom system.
In 1866 Ernst Heackel proposed three kingdom system of plantae, Animalia
and Protista. As protista kingdom consisted of both prokaryotes and
eucarytoes, Copeland in 1956 proposed four kingdom system.
Four Kingdom System (Monera Protista Planatae Animalia)
● Finally R. Whittaker (1969) using three criteria together i.e. complexity of
cell structure, body structure and mode of nutrition proposed five kingdom
system in which he separated out kingdom fungi from plantae.
Five Kingdom System (Monera Protista Fungi Plantae Animalia)
●  Biological system of taxonomy and systematics got a big boost when
system of ‘Binomial nomenclature, introduced by Carlous Linneaus also
called Father of taxonomy was included into naming of living organism.
According to system, the name were to be written in Latin language and a
name consists of two, generic name to be written first starting with capital
letter followed by specific epithet i.e. name of species. For example, a
population of lions represents the species Panthera leo



CYTOLOGY
A cell first observed by Robert Hooke in 1665 and later by Von
Leeuwenhoek has been described as the structural and functional unit of life.
It is also considered as hereditary unit with genes on DNA in chromosome.
Eukaryote – Within the cell, in most of plants and animals, there are various
membrane bound structures called cell organelles like mitochondria,
chloroplast, nucleus, etc. Such a cell is known as an eukaryote. There are
non-membrane bound organelles also present in eukaryotic cells such as
ribosomes and nucleolus. Each cell organelle performs a specific function of
the cell in a well organised manner.
Prokaryote – In bacteria, mycoplasma, and blue green algae cells, there are
no definite cell organelles and the nucleoplasm and cytoplasm is not
separated i.e. well defined nucleus is lacking in them. Such a cell is known as
a prokaryote. Prokaryotic cells can also carry out all biological functions
similar to those of eukaryotic cells. However, the absence of membrane
bound structures within the cell simply shows that they are primitive cells.
Structure and Function of Cell Organelles
 

Organelle Structure Function
1. Cell Wall Found in plant cells only; (i) It provides shape,

mainly made up of strength and rigidity to the cells.
cellulose and (ii) Cell protection
hemicellulose, chitin (iii) Transport of various
(fungus), protein substances
(bacteria). (iv) Helps in cell expansion

2. Nucleus Contains DNA and (i) Division of the cell
protein; limited by a (ii) Inheritance of characters.
nuclear membrane in (iii) Controls various metabolic
eukaryotic cells, nuclear activities
membrane not found in of the cell.
prokaryotic cells, contains
nucleolus; nucleoplasm
contains chromatin
material.



3. Double membraneous, Site of cellular respiration
Mitochondria outer and inner membrane (Krebs cycle and electron

folded inside forming transport chain); associated with
cristae; the inner surface the release of energy by the
of the inner membrane has oxidation of food (oxidative
a number of F1 or phosphorylation).
elementary particles.

4. Plastids Double membraneous (i) Site of photosynthesis in
structure, inner membrane green plants i.e.
in the form of thylakoids kitchen of a plant cell.
forming stroma and grana, (ii) Release of energy in the
They are of three types: process of photosynthesis
(i) Chloroplasts contain (photophosphorylation).
chlorophyll

 (ii) Chromoplasts contain (iii) Provide different colours to
pigments other than flowers and fruits.
chlorophyll (iv) Store the food of the plant
(iii) Leucoplasts do not body.
contain any pigment.

5. Membrane folds forming Provides surface for various
Endoplasmic ciste- rnae, vesicles and chemical reactions and the
reticulum tubules; of two types SER transport of substances within

(without ribosomes) and the cell.
RER (with ribosomes).

6. Golgi Stacks of membranes in Secretion, absorption and
Complex the form of cisternae, transport of various susbtances

vacuoles and vesicles; in within the cell.
plant cells known as
dictyosomes.

7. Lysosomes Single membrane sacs Digestion of own cell organelles
containing hydrolytic during starvation hence called
enzymes; classified as “suicidal bags of a cell”.
primary lysosomes,
secondary lysosomes,
autophagic vacuoles and



residual bodies depending
upon the physiological
state of their action.

8. Microbodies Small-sized organelles Photorespiration in plant cells
(i) containing enzymes like and lipid metabolism in animal
Peroxisomes catalyses and oxidases. cells. Exact function not known,
(ii) Small spherical bodies show some lytic activity.
Spherosomes having high deposits of During germination converts
(iii) fats and lipids; enzymes fatty acids to soluble
Glyoxysomes like acid phosphates are carbohydrates — glyoxylate

found. cycle.
Small bodies found in the
seeds of groundnut and
castor (that contain fatty
acids).

9. Ribosomes Small bodies containing Site of protein synthesis, protein
RNA and proteins; a factories of a cell.
group of ribosomes
attached to a mRNA
strand forms
polyribosomes.

10. Centriole Two dot-like bodies (i) Forms spindle-fibres at the
present near the nucleus; time of cell division.
shows 9+0 pattern of (ii) Involved in the formation of
arrangement of cilia and flagella of the cell.
microtubules. (iii) Helps in the formation of

sperms from spermatids.
11. Cilia and Surrounded by a Locomotion in unicellular
Flagella membraneous covering; organisms

shows 9+2 pattern of
arrangement of
microtubules

12. Long, unbranched Transport of substances in higher
Microtubules cylindrical tubes made up organisms.

of proteins like tubulin



and and actin; forms network (i) Maintenance of cell and
Microfilaments in the cytoplasm of the chromosome movements.

cell. (ii) Contraction and relaxation of
muscles.

13. Vacuoles Unit membraneous bags (i) contain various materials
filled with cell-fluids; (ii) Osmo-regulatory in function
membrane is known as
tonoplast.

 



Difference between Plant cell and Animal cell
Plant Cell Animal Cell

Plant cells are larger in size. Animal cells are generally smaller
in size.

Plastid present. Plastid absent.
Cell wall present, made up of cellulose Cell wall absent.
and chitin.
Centro some absent. Centrosome present.
Vacuoles are larger in size. Vacuoles are smaller in size.
 
Difference between DNA and RNA

 RNA DNA

(i) The sugar is ribose. The sugar is deoxyribose
(ii) It is a single-stranded structure It is a double-stranded structure
(iii) Adenine, guanine, uracil instead Adenine, guanine, cytosine and

of thymine and cytosine are the thymine constitute the four bases.
four bases. It is found only in the nucleus and

(iv) It is found both in the nucleus in organelles like mitochondria and
and in the cytoplasm. chloroplasts.

Cell Division – It is a mode of reproduction in some lower animals like
unicellular organisms like amoeba. In higher organisms i.e. plants and
animals, responsible for growth, repair or replacement of injured and
damaged body parts. In sexually reproducing organisms, it is also involved in
gamete formation. Hence, there are two distinct modes of cell division in
higher organisms called mitosis and meiosis.
Mitosis is an equational cell division responsible for providing growth to an
organism. The process completes in two phases called karyokinesis (nuclear
division) followed by cytokinesis (cytoplasm division).
Meiosis : It is the reductional division restricted to germinal cells involved in
formation of germ cells also called gametes. Thus daughter cells carry half
the number (haploid) chromosomes compared to the number of



chromosomes present in the parental cell. The whole meiosis completes into
two broad phases called meiosis-I and meiosis-II.
BOTANY
● Botany is the scientific study of plants.
Classification of Plants
A. Cryptogamae – These plants do not bear flowers or seeds and reproduce
by spores. They have three divisions.
1. Thallophyte – They are most primitive plants devoid of any body
differentiation.
They are divided into two classes :
(a) Algae – They are simple plants, largely found in marine or freshwater
habitats. Some algae are terrestrial also. e.g. Blue green algae (Nostoc), green
algae (Ulothrix), red algae.
(b) Lichens – Lichens grow on rocks, tree-trunks and are symbiotic
associations between algae and fungi, e.g. Usnea, Parmelia. Lichens are
considered as the pioneer community for succession of plants on rocks
surfaces. They are also considered as the air pollution indicator particularly
one caused by sulphur dioxide. In presence of gas SO2, they die or perish,
hence indicator of air pollution.
2. Bryophyte – These are simple, terrestrial plants commonly found in moist
habitats. e.g. Funaria, Riccia.
3. Pteridophyte – These are vascular non-seed bearing plants. They are
found mainly in shady or damp places.
B. Phanerogamae – These are higher plants bearing flowers and seeds.
There body is differentiated into root, stem and leaves and vascular system is
well–developed. These are divided into Gymnosperms and Angiosperms.
1. Gymnosperms – These lack vessels and are the naked seed bearing
vascular plants. They include cycads and conifers.
2. Angiosperms – They are vascular seed bearing plants characterised by
their flowers containing the male and female reproductive structures.
These are further divided into two groups :
(a) Monocotyledons – They are characterised by parallel leaf venation,
fibrous roots and a single cotyledon in the seed. e.g. wheat (Triticum
vulgare), rice (Oryza Sativa), Maize (Zea mays).
(b) Dicotyledons – They are characterised by reticulate leaf venation, tap
root and having two cotyledons in the seed e.g. Rose (Rose indica), apple



(Malus silvestris), Pea (Pisum sativum).
PLANT TISSUES
On the basis of dividing capacity plant tissues can be classified as :
1. Meristematic tissue
Growth of plants occurs only in regions where meristematic tissues are
present. Depending on the region where they are present, they are classified
as apical, lateral and intercalary meristem.
(a) Apical meristem – It is present at the growing tips of stem and root and
increases the length of the stem and root.
(b) Lateral meristem– It increases the girth of stem or root. It is also called
cambium.
(c) Intercalary meristem– It is located at the base of leaves or internodes on
twigs.
2.Permanent tissue
The cells formed by meristematic tissue acquire permanent shape, size and
function and lose the ability to divide.
A.Simple permanent tissue –
(i) Parenchyma – It consists of unspecialised cell with thin cell walls. The
cells are loosely packed with large intercellular spaces. When it contains
chlorophyll and performs photosynthesis it is called chlorenchyma. In
aquatic plants, they have large air cavities and give buoyancy to the plants
called aerenchyma.
Functions– (i) It provides support to the plants (ii) It stores food and water in
stems and roots.
(ii) Collenchyma– The cells are living, elongated and irregularly thickened
at the corners. They have very little intercellular spaces.
Functions– (i) It provides flexibility to plant parts like leaf and stem. (ii) It
provides mechanical support.
(iii) Sclerenchyma– The cells are dead. They are long and narrow. Walls are
thickened due to deposition of lignin.
Functions – (i) It makes plant hard and stiff., eg. Coconut husk. (ii) It
provides mechanical strength.
Various types of simple tissues (a) parenchyma, (b) collenchyma and (c)
sclerenchyma as shown below :
B.Complex permanent tissue– It is made of more than one type of cells. All
cells perform same function. It is of two types – xylem and phloem.



Xylem– It consists of tracheids, vessels, xylem parenchyma and xylem
fibres. Cell are thick walled and mostly dead.
Functions : (i) Tracheids and vessels transport water and minerals vertically.
(ii) Fibres are supportive.
Phloem
It is made of sieve tubes, companion cells, phloem fibres, and phloem
parenchyma. Except phloem fibres, phloem cells are living.
Function– (i) Transports food from leaves to other parts of the plant.
Various type of complex tissues : (a) Xylem (i) Tracheid (ii) Vessel (b)
Phloem
PLANT STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS
The Root
● The plant structure that grows into the soil and anchors the plant to the
ground for absorption of water and minerals.
● Roots develop from the radicle of the embryo.
● Roots differ from shoots in lacking chlorophyll and in the arrangement of
Xylem and Phloem.
Kinds of Root Systems
(1) Tap Root System – Root develops from the radicle and continues
growing actively producing lateral branches. Tap roots are characteristic of
most of the dicot plants.
(2) Fibrous Root System – In monocot the radicle (embryonic root) at the
time of germination produce fibrous roots with many branches.
(3) Adventious Root System – Root develops from any part of the plant
other than the radicle. They occur in grasses and may be regarded as
characteristic of monocot plants.
Modifications of Roots
(1) Fusiform – Swollen root, tapering at both ends. e.g. Sweet potato.
(2) Napiform – Root is globular and tapers abruptly e.g. Beet root, Turnip.
(3) Tuberous – Root with no definite shape e.g. 4’O clock plant.
(4) Fasciculated – When storage roots occur in cluster e.g Dahila,
Asparagus.
(5) Beaded – When roots are swollen at frequent intervals e.g. Bitter gourd.
(6) Assimilatory – Roots which develop chlorophyll and carry out
photosynthesis e.g. Tinospora and Trapa.



(7) Haustoria – These are the roots of the parasitic plants which penetrate
the host tissue e.g. Cuscuta.
(8) Pneumatophores – These are aerial roots found in plants growing in
marshy conditions for gaseous exchange e.g. Rhizophora.
Functions of Root
(1) The roots absorb water and minerals from the soil and transport them
through xylem.
(2) The roots fix the plant to the soil firmly.
(3) Some roots help in vegetative propagation of species e.g. Sweet pptato.
The Stem
●  Stem is a longitudinal axis upon which are borne the leaves, buds and
reproductive organs (flowers) of the plants.
● The stem along with its leafy branches and reproductive appendages called
flowers constitutes the shoot system of the plant.
Modifications of Stems
(1) Underground Modifications –
They are of four types.
(i) Rhizome – horizontally growing, fleshy, underground stem e.g. Ginger,
Turmeric etc.
(ii) Bulb – The stem is reduced to a disc like structure, bearing concentric
layers of fleshy leafy bases that comprises the food store e.g. Onion, Garlic.
(iii) Tuber – A swollen underground stem that contains stored food, and acts
as an organ of perennation and vegetative propagation. e.g. Potato.
(iv) Corm – Short erect fleshy swollen underground stem. e.g. Alocasia,
Colocasia.
The Leaf
●  Leaf is a flattened appendage of the stem that arises as a superficial
outgrowth from the apical meristem.
● Leaves are the chief photosynthetic organs of the plant.
● Collectively leaves constitute the foliage of the plant.
● Leaves initiate from the shoot meristem as Primordia and gradually emerge
as they grow older.
Types of Leaves
● Depending upon the incision of lamina, they are of two kinds —
(i) Simple leaves (ii) Compound leaves.
● Simple Leaves – A leaf is said to be simple when its lamina is entire or is
incised but the incision do not touch the midrib.



● Compound leaves – A leaf is said to be compound when its lamina is
completely divided into two or more distinct segments or leaflets.
● Compound leaves may be of two types (a) Pinnate and (b) Palmate.
The Flower
● Flower is the characteristic reproductive structure of an angiosperm.
●  Morphologically, the flower is considered as a shoot bearing nodes and
modified floral leaves.
● Flowers exhibit wide variation in size, shape, colour and arrangement of
floral parts. Petal
Structure of a flower
Basic Plan of Flowers
● The stalk of the flower is called Pedicel.
● Sepals are green, leaf-like structure that arise at the base of a flower and
forms the outermost circle of appendage.
● Collectively the Sepals are referred to as Calyx. They provide protection to
flower during bud stage.
● The whorl of appendages that arise inner to sepals is petals.
● Petals are brightly coloured and are collectively called Corolla.
● The third group of appendages consists of Stamens, collectively called the
Androecium.
● Each stamen consists of a slender stalk, the filament and the pollen grains
bearing anther.
● The stamens are the male reproductive organs of the flower.
● The centre of the flower contains the female reproductive whorl called the
Gynoecium or Pistil.
● Pistil is composed of one or more carpels.
● Each Carpel consists of three parts — Stigma, Style and Ovary.
Pollination
● The term pollination refers to the transfer and deposition of pollen grains
on the stigmatic surface of the flower. It can be self or cross pollination. Each
flower is well adapted and modified for its mode of pollination.
● In insect pollinated flowers the pollen grains are smooth and sticky but in
wind pollinated flowers, the pollen grains are light, dry and rough. All
sexually reproducing plants are characterized by the double fertilization in
which ovule develops into seed and ovary with its parts develops into fruits.
In some plants like grapes and banana, the fruit development may take place
without fertilization. Such fruits are called parthenocarpic fruits. In some



other plants the cells of other parts of ovary get involved in embryo
formation. Such plants like orange are known to show polyembryoeny.
●  A seed endospermic or not upon receiving water, oxygen from air and
suitable temperature except in some seeds sun light (called photoblastic)
germinate to produce seedling depending upon the transent stored food in
form of endosperm (endosperm) or cotyledon (non-endospermic).
Plant Hormones and their functions

 Plant Hormones and their functions

Hormone Functions
Auxins Prevent premature fall of leaves, fruits etc., promotes

enlargement, stimulates respiration lat crol root
developement.

Gibberellins Promote germination, promote flowering, responsible for
breaking dormancy of buds.

Ethylene Gasous hormone triggers fruit ripening, accelerates
abscission of leaves, flowers and fruits.

Cytokinin Break dormancy in seeds, delay the ageing process in plants.
Abscisic Acid It is a growth regulator, involves in the dormancy of seeds,

acts as a stress hormone.

FRUITS
● A Fruit is a ripened ovary.
●  Fruit is formed through the processes of pollination followed by
fertilization which stimulates the ovary to grow into a fruit.
● The fruit consists of a fruit wall, the Pericarp.
Zones of Fruit Wall (Pericarp)
1. Epicarp – Outer Skin.
2. Mesocarp – Sweet, edible fleshy.
3. Endocarp – Innermost hard zone that encloses the seed(s).
Types of Fruits
1. True Fruits – Fruit which is derived only from the single ovary of a single
flower and in the development of which no other part outside the ovary has
taken part is called the true fruit e.g. Mango.



2. False Fruit – When apart from the ovary other floral parts also take part in
the formation of fruit, it is called as false fruit. e.g. Apple, Banana and
Strawberry.
3. Simple Fruits – A simple fruit is one in which ovary takes part in
development e.g. Bean, Mustard, Citrus.
4. Aggregate Fruit – In an aggregate fruit each free carpel develops
independently to form a bunch of fruits e.g. Strawberry, Custard apple.
5. Composite Fruit – A composite or multiple fruit develops from an
inflorescence by the fusion of flowers and their parts e.g. Pineapple.
Common fruit with types and edible parts

Fruit Type Edible part
Apple Fleshy, Simple, Pome False fruit, fleshy thalamus
Orange Fleshy, Simple, Hesperdium Mesocarp and endocarp
Lithchi Simple Nut Fleshy Juicy aril
Mango Fleshy, simple, Drupe Mesocarp
Gauva Fleshy, simple, berry Thalamus and pericarp
Coconut Fleshy, simple, drupe Endosperm
Tomato Fleshy, simple, berry Pericarp and placentae
Wheat & Maize Indehiscent, simple Caryopsis Starchy endosperm
Banana Fleshy, simple, berry Mesocarp and endocarp

ZOOLOGY
● Zoology is the scientific study of animals.
● The animal kingdom is divided into two main sub-kingdoms – Protozoa
and Metazoa.
● Protozoa are unicellular or acellular organisms. Metazoa are multicellular
organisms.
●  The two major groups of Metazoans are the non-chordates and the
chordates.
● They derive the names from the absence or presence of notochord.
● A notochord is present at same time in the life of Chordates.
● Non-Chordates don’t possess a notochord at any stage of their life.
● Hemi chordates or cephalo chordates have notochord in embryonic stage.



ANIMAL TISSUES
The tissues which make up different parts of an organ of an organism
(animals) body are called animal tissues. The different types of animal
tissues include epithelial tissue, connective tissues, muscular tissues and
nervous tissue.
Epithelial tissues : These are fundamental animal tissues, simple or
stratified with basal membrane called basement membrane. Epithelium can
be endothelium like those involved in formation of the lining of heart, blood
vessels or mesothelium like pleural or pericardial cavities.
Connective tissues : As the name suggests, the tissue is concerned with
connecting of different body parts. There are three types of animal
connective tissue called vascular, connective proper and skeletal tissue.
Blood and lymph are fluid connective tissues. Blood has all three types of
corpuscles i.e., RBC, WBC and blood platelets but lymph has only WBC
being devoid of RBC and blood platelets.
Cartilage and bones are the two types of skeletal connective tissues, cartilage
are soft like outer, ear/nose, tongue etc. with protein called chondrin but
bones are hard deposit of tricalcium phosphate (Ca3(PO4)2). In mouth each
tooth that represents a bone has the enamel, the hardest body part as the
outermost covering being resistant to mechanical or chemical effect. The
mast cells present in areolar tissue produce histamine for allergic action.
Muscular tissues : There are three different types of muscular tissues called
skeletal, smooth and cardiac muscles. The skeletal muscles also called
striated muscles with alternate light and dark bands of protein actin and
myosin are cylindrical, multinucleated with nucleus at periphery and
voluntary. They are mostly found attached to body bones for movement and
locomotion.
● Smooth muscles are involuntary, spindle shape with actin and myosin.
They mostly form the lining of alimentary canal, respiratory tract, etc.
Their alternate contraction and relaxation provides movement to the
substances present in body cavity such as of food in alimentary called
peristalsis.
The Cardiac muscles are striated muscles like skeletal muscles with alternate
light and dark band but are involuntary in action and uninucleated with single
nucleus present in the centre. They are also highly branched and found only
in the heart wall.



●  The whole of nervous tissue is made of nerve cells called neurons, the
longest of body cells and never divides in life once formed in body.
The flow of nerve impulse generated and propagated by Na+
●  In CNS, spinal cord is responsible for coordination of short lived,
involuntary action called reflex action but brain is for voluntary with main
actions such as thinking, memory, reasoning, hearing, vision and balance.
ELEMENTARY PHYSIOLOGY
Human Body
● The Human Body has nine systems :
1. The Digestive System 2. The Respiratory System
3. The Circulatory System 4. The Excretory System 5. The Endocrine
System 6. The Reproductive System.
7. The Skeletal System 8. The Muscular System
9. The Nervous System
The Digestive System
●  Digestion is the process of biochemical transformation of complex and
large food particles into simpler form, making it suitable for absorption and
assimilation. The process of the breakdown of large food molecules into
simpler compounds is catalysed by special enzymes.
Organs involved and their functions
● The Mouth : Ingestion and chewing takes place in the mouth with the help
of teeth. Humans are heterodonts with four types of teeth in pattern of 2 :1 : 2
: 3. A starch hydrolysing enzyme, Ptyalin is present in the saliva added to
food during chewing.
●  The Oesophagus : The mouth leads to a funnel-shaped pharynx which
communicates with a long muscular tube-like oesophagus. The oesophagus
opens into the stomach carrying the food by peristalsis.
● The Stomach : The stomach is a large muscular sac. It has many glands on
its wall. The cells of these gastric glands secrete HCI, proteindigesting
enzymes and mucin in the lumen (cavity) of the stomach. The mixture of
their secretions in the gastric lumen is called Gastric Juice.
It digests proteins in the stomach into amino acids, peptones or peptides.
●  The Small Intestine : The small intenstine is distinguished into three
parts, viz, Duodenum, Jejunum and Ileum. The common bile duct opens into
duodenum and drains juices from pancreas and liver. The jejunum follows
duodenum and is longer and more coiled. The last part or ileum is also



highly–coiled and opens into the large intenstine. Nearly all absorption of
digested material takes place from the wall of the ileum through the villi.
From intestine absorbed food is taken to liver by hepatic portal vein.
● The Large Intestine : The large intestine has three parts, Caccum, Colon
and Rectum. The walls of the large intestine absorb much of the water.
So it is not lost from the body. The semi–solids which remain are called
faeces. They are stored in large intestine and passed out at intervals through
Steps involved : Ingestion→ Digestion → Absorption → Assimilation
→ Egestion
STAGES IN DIGESTION

Part of the Gland and its Enzyme Substrate Product of
Alimentary secretion secreted Digestion

Canal
Mouth Salivary gland Salivary Starch Maltose

: amylase
Saliva (Ptyalin)

Oesophagus None None None None
Stomach Glands lining Pepsin in Proteins, Proteases and

the stomach : adults coagulation of Peptones
Gastric juice Renin in milk proteins Casein
and children (Caseinogen)
hydrochloric
acid.

Duodenum 1. Liver : Bile None Fats 1. Emulsified
juice fat

2. Provides an
alkaline
medium for
the action of
intenst- inal
juices

 2. Pancrease : 1. Amylopsin Strach Maltose and
Pancreatic 2. Trypsin Proteins glucose
Juice peptones, Proteases,



3. Steapsin peptides, Fatty acids
(lipase) amino acids and glycerol

Fats
Ileum Glands lining Erepsin Proteins and Amino acids

the ileum : (Peptidase) peptides Glucose and
Intenstinal Maltase Maltose Fructose
juice. Sucrase Sucrose Glucose and

(invertase) Lactose galactose
Lactase

Colon None None None Absorbs water
and mineral
salts forming
feaces

Rectum None None None Temporarily
stores
undigested
food before
egestion

 
The Respiratory System
● The Respiratory System takes in oxygen from the air and expels carbon
dioxide and water vapour.
● The mammalian respiratory system consists of nasal cavity, nasopharynx,
larynx, trachea, bronchi, bronchioles and alveoli in lungs.
● The lungs are enclosed in double walled sacs called Pleura.
●  During inspiration, the diaphragm and external intercostals muscles
contracts, due to which diaphragm moves down. i.e. flattens the volume of
thorax increases, which lead to fall in pressure inside.
●  Expiration is carried out passively by relaxation of diaphragm and
intercoastal muscles. The volume of thorax decreases and pressure inside
thorax and lungs increases to expel the air to outside.
The Circulatory System
● The Circulatory System is constituted of following important parts :



1. Arteries : These are large thick elastic walled blood vessels that carries
blood from the heart to the limbs and organs. All arteries except the
pulmonary artery carry oxygenated blood.
2. Veins : A blood vessel that conveys blood from the capillary network in
the tissues/organs to the heart. All veins except the pulmonary vein carry
deoxygenated blood. They all have valves to prevent back flow of blood.
3. Heart : The human heart is situated in the thorax between the lungs with
its apex resting on the diaphragm is responsible for double circulation. It
consists of four chamber viz two Atria (Auricles) and two Ventricles. The
Auricles receive blood from the veins. The ventricles pump blood into the
arteries. Human heart beats at the rate of about 72/min in the resting
condition i.e. a single beat completes in 0.8 sec.
The Excretory System
●  Metabolism of different chemical susbstances produces different waste
products in the body. The process of elimination of these metabolic waste
products from the body is called excretion.
● Important constituent organs of the excretory system are :
1. Skin
●  Human skin possess glands for secreting two fluids on its sufrace viz.
sweat from sweat glands and sebum from sebaceous gland.
● Sweat is an aqueous fluid containing mainly sodium chloride, lactic acid,
urea, amino acids and glucose.
● Sebum is wax–like secretion which eliminates some lipids, hydrocarbons
and fatty acids.
2. Kidney
● Kidneys are a pair of the urine forming organs.
● Nephrons are functional units of kidney.
The Nervous System
●  They form urine and drain it ultimately into the pelvis of kidney, from
where the ureter arises.
●  Ureters from both the kidneys finally open into urinary bladder which
stores urine temporarily.
●  Urethra arises from the neck of the bladder and conducts urine to the
exterior.
● The act of temporary storage then expulsion of it is called micturition.
● In a normal person daily output of urine is about 1-1.5 litre.



●  Each time a person expels urine he/she loses 420 ml of urine normal
capacity of urinary bladder.
3. Lungs
● Lungs regularly participate in the excretion of some volatile materials by
respiration.
●  The entire volume of carbon dioxide, produced in the body, and some
moisture are regularly excreted in the expelled air.
4. Liver
●  Liver is principal organ for the excretion of cholesterol, bile pigments
(bilirubin and biliverdin) produced from dead RBC and inactivated products
of steroid hormones, some vitamins and many drugs. It is also the site of
production of urea from proteins and ammonia (deamination).
The Nervous System
●  The Nervous System receives information about external and internal
changes, conducts such information between different parts of the body and
coordinates their activities in the light of those changes.
● The Nervous System consists of the Central Nervous System, Peripheral
Nervous System and Autonomic Nervous System.
The Central Nervous System
● The Central Nervous System consists of brain and spinal cord.
● The forebrain consists of cerebrum, it is the largest part of human brain.
● Brain and spinal cord are covered by three connective tissue membranes–
pia matter, archnoid matter and dura matter.
●  An extra–cellular fluid called Cerebrospinal fluid produced by cerebral
plexus occurs between pia and archnoid matter. It affords some protection to
CNS against mechanical injury and shock, it exchanges materials.
●  Hypothalamus contain higher nerve centres for osmoregulation,
temperature regulation, hunger, thirst and emotional functions. It secretes five
neurohormones which control secretions of pituitary hormones, It synthesises
the posterior pituitary hormones.
●  Cerebellum is second largest portion of brain located at base, under the
cerebrum. It helps in maintaining body balance and posture, when walking,
running or swimming etc.
● Cerebral hemisphere is divided into frontal, parietal, temporal and occipital
lobes each with its own association centres.
● The spinal cord is present in a series of 31 sections called vertebrae.



Each segment giving rise to pair of spinal nerve.
● From brain it arise as an extension of medulla that comes out of cavity in
skull called formen of magnum.
Peripheral Nervous System (PNS)
● PNS is composed of spinal nerves and cranial nerves.
●  Neurons and nerve fibres conduct nerve impulses from the CNS to
peripheral organ are called efferent neurons.
● Neurons and nerve fibres conduct nerve impluses from periphery to CNS
are called afferent neurons.
● Neurons and nerve fibres which cause movement of the muscles are called
motor neurons.
● There are 31 pairs of spinal nerves and 12 pairs of cranial nerves among
humans.
Autonomic Nervous System (ANS)
●  Nerves conveying impulses to glands, involuntary muscles and heart
muscles constitute ANS.
●  ANS is divided into two Sympathetic and Parasympathetic nervous
system.
●  Sympathetic nerves enhance the force and rate of heart beat, constrict
blood vessel, raise arterial blood pressure, dilate pupils, relax urinary bladder
to help body adjust to changes.
● Parasympathetic nerves, decrease both rate and force of heart beat, dilate
many blood vessel, lower the blood pressure, constrict the pupils, contract
the urinary bladder. i.e. brings body back to normal after the change.
● Tongue (Taste) : position of taste sensation over tongue sweet-top, sour-
sides, bitter-back.
The Skeletal System Axial Skeleton (80 bones) Skull
Cranium 8 Face 14 Ear ossicles 6 Hyoid bone 1 Vertibral column vertebrae
26 (cervical 7, thoracic 12, lumbar 5, sacrum 1, coccyx1) Thorax : Sternum 1
Ribs 24
Appendicular Skeleton (126 bones) Upper Regions
Pectoral girdle : Clavicle 2 Scapula 2 Arm : Humerus (upper arm) 2 Radius
2 Ulna 2 Carpals (wrist) 16 Metacarpals (palm) 10 Phalanges (jingers) 28
Lower extremities : Pelvic
(hip) Girdles 2 Femur (thigh) 2 Tibia 2 Fibula 2 Patela (knee cap) 2 Tarsals
14 Metatarsals 10 Phalanges 28 Skull Ball & Socket Joint (Shoulder)



Humerus Hinge Joint (knee) Tibia Pelvis Femur Radius Rib Sternum
Vertebra Fixed Joint (parieto - temporal) Ulna Fibula
● In skeletal system where two bones meet is called joint. It can be movable
allowing movement of bones or immovable. The moveable joints are hinge
joints or ball and socket type depending on type of motion, they permit. In
movable joints, bones have synovial membrane with synovial fluid to
facilitate easy movement.
Types of skeleton : There are three types of skeleton called.
(i) Hydrostatic skeleton : In organisms showing hydrostatic skeleton, the
musles contract to change the shape of coelom produces movement due to
the presence of fluid inside fluid-filed cavity such as in earthworms, round
worms, etc.
(ii) Exoskeleton : It is the skeleton made of chitin and calcium carbonate
found outside the body such as in insects.
Therefore animals with exoskeleton have to shed off the skeleton from time
to time growth.
(iii) Endo skeleton : It is comprised of bones and cartilages found in higher
animals such as birds and mammal.
The Endocrine System
●  Endocrine glands are ductless glands which secrete hormones into the
blood. Hormones are informational molecules. They regulate functions of
other organs and tissues. Their actions are more widespread but slower than
nerve impulses in coordinating the activities of different organs and tissues.
Endocrine System and its Functioning

Part of the Gland and its Enzyme Substrate Product of
Alimentary secretion secreted Digestion

Canal
Mouth Salivary gland Salivary Starch Maltose

: amylase
Saliva (Ptyalin)

Oesophagus None None None None
Stomach Glands lining Pepsin in Proteins, Proteases and

the stomach : adults coagulation of Peptones
Gastric juice Renin in milk proteins Casein
and children (Caseinogen)



hydrochloric
acid.

Duodenum 1. Liver : Bile None Fats 1. Emulsified
juice fat

2. Provides an
alkaline
medium for
the action of
intenst- inal
juices

 2. Pancrease : 1. Amylopsin Strach Maltose and
Pancreatic 2. Trypsin Proteins glucose
Juice 3. Steapsin peptones, Proteases,

(lipase) peptides, Fatty acids
amino acids and glycerol
Fats

Ileum Glands lining Erepsin Proteins and Amino acids
the ileum : (Peptidase) peptides Glucose and
Intenstinal Maltase Maltose Fructose
juice. Sucrase Sucrose Glucose and

(invertase) Lactose galactose
Lactase

Colon None None None Absorbs water
and mineral
salts forming
feaces

Rectum None None None Temporarily
stores
undigested
food before
egestion

 
BLOOD
Blood



Blood Cells Blood Platelets Plasma Fluid matrix Erythrocytes Leukocyte
Neutrophilis Eosinophils Granulocytes Agranulocytes Basophilis Monocytes
Lymphocytes
● Blood is a fluid connective tissue along with lymph.
● Erythrocytes (RBC) are most numerous of the formed element of blood.
Their most characteristic feature is presence of haemoglobin and absence of
nucleus.
● The total number of erythrocytes per microlitre of blood is known as total
count of RBC. It averages 5 and 4.5 million percc of blood in adult man and
adult women respectively.
● The total count would be low in anaemia.
● The abnormal rise in total count in RBC is called polycythemia.
● Erythrocyte participate in transporting oxygen from lungs to tissue.
● CO2 is carried in both plasma and RBC as bicarbonate ions of sodium.
● In foetus, erythrocytes are mainly formed in the liver and spleen. But from
birth onwards, erythrocytes are formed in red bone marrow while destroyed
in liver and spleen (grave yard of RBC).
● Erythrocyte has average life of 120 days.
● Iron (Fe-II) and proteins are essential raw material while B12
and folic acid stimulate synthesis and maturation.
● Leukocytes (WBC) are devoid of haemoglobin and are nucleated.
● Neutrophils and monocytes protect the body against microbes.
●  Lymphocytes secrete antibodies in the blood to destroy microbes and
neutralise their toxin.
● The number of leukocytes per micro litre of blood is called total count of
WBC. It is normally 5000 in humans. The ratio of RBC to WBC is 1000 :1.
● Blood Platelets (thrombocytes) are non nucleated, round or oval, biconvex
cell.
● Their normal life span is a week.
● When blood vessel is injured, platelets get clamped at the injured spot and
release certain chemical called Platelet Factor, which promote blood
coagulation.
●  The extra–cellular fluid is strawcoloured, slightly alkaline and aqueous
called plasma, which is 30%-35% of blood.
● Plasma contains 92% of water and three major classes of plasma proteins –
albumin, globulin and fibrinogen. It serves as source of protein for tissue
cells.



●  Albumin and globulin retain water in blood plasma. A fall in plasma
protein leads to filtering out of excessive volumes of water from blood to
tissue.
● This is why hands and feet get swollen with accumulated fluid in person
suffering from dietary deficiency of protein.
●  Plasma functions in transport, body immunity, prevention of blood loss,
retention of fluid in blood, maintenance of pH, uniform distribution of heat.
Functions of Blood
1. Transport
(a) Respiratory gases (b) Nutrients
(c) Waste products (d) Hormones, enzymes, minerals
2. Protective Function
(a) Production of antibodies (b) Phagocytosis
(c) Clotting mechanism
3. Regulatory Function
(a) Body temperature (b) pH balance
(c) Fluid balance
Blood Coagulation
● Coagulation is brought about by hydrolysis of soluble fibrinogen of blood
plasma to insoluble fibrin. This is catalysed by an enzyme called thrombin.
Fibrin precipitate as network of fibres.
● Thrombin occurs in blood as an inactive globulin called Prothrombin.
●  In case of injury, Coagulation promoting substances called
Thromboplastins are released, which help in formation of enzyme
Prothromkinase.
This enzyme hydrolyses prothrombin to thrombin. Ca2+ ions and vit.k are
essential for both the activation and action of thrombin.
Body injury Prothrombin Thromboplastin Thrombin Fibrinogen Fibrin
(Blood Clot) Ca2 + vit – k
● In some people timely blood clotting does not take place. They are known
to suffer from haemophilia.
Blood Groups
● K. Landsteiner in 1900 classified human beings in four groups on the basis
of the reactions of their blood A, B, AB and O.
●  Blood compatibility depends upon chemicals called agglutinogen or
antigens on the surface of the red cells and chemicals called agglutinin or
antibodies in the plasma.



● There are two types of antigen: A and B; and two types of antibody: anti-A
and anti-B.
●  Blood Transfusion. Anti-A plasma agglutinates A red cells, and anti-B
plasma agglutinates B red cells. So these combinations of plasma and red cell
are incompatible as far as blood transfusion is concerned. However a child’s
blood group can not directly be used for providing the maternity or faterinity
as a father or mother with blood group A & B can have blood group AB or O
type too.
ANTIGENS AND ANTIBODIES

Blood Antigen Antibody May donate May receive
group blood to blood from

A A b A, AB A,O
B B a B, AB B, O
AB A,B neither a nor b AB A, B, AB, O
O neither a,b A, B, AB, O O

A nor B
●  Rh factor : Called Rhesus factor, people having it are Rh+ and people
without it are Rh–. Problem arise at time of tansfusion of Rh+ and Rh–
and same at time of pregnancy, first Rh+ foetus in Rh– mother is safe if
mother is transferred with Rh+ blood. But in 2nd pregnancy disintegration of
RBC of feotus occur causing anaemia and death. These days to prevent this
Rhogan containing defective unit anti Rh antibody are injected in pregnant
mother.
Blood Group Chart

Blood group of Possible blood group of Impossible blood group
Parents children/offsprings of children offspring

O x O O A, B, AB
O x A O, A B, AB
O x B O, B A, AB
O x AB A, B O, AB
A x A A, O B, AB
A x B A, B, AB, O —



A x AB A, B, AB O
B x B B, O A, AB
B x AB A, B, AB O
AB x AB A, B, AB O

REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
●  Humans like mammals show sexual dimorphism with male and female
reproductive organs present in different individuals.
●  In males the primary sex organs are a pair of testes found in muscular
pouch called scrotum that hangs outside human body because development
of sperms requires 2°-3°C less temperature than body temperature.
●  During excitation, the sperms passes into urethra where secretions from
seminal vesicle and prostate gland takes place.
●  The seminal vesicle added fructose rich secretion to provide energy for
swimming of sperms and the secretion from prostate gland is basic in nature
to neutralise acidity of urine before it could damage the sperms.
● The mixture of mucus along with secretions from glands and sperm that is
ejaculated is called semen.
●  Female Reproductive System : In human females, a pair of ovaries
located in lower abdominal cavity on either side of vertebral column are the
primary female sex organ.
● In females ovary although primary oocytes are present right from birth as
their formation occurs during foetal stage, the development starts with
beginning of adolescence at an age of about 12 years when the first
menstrual cycle called menarche occurs to end with menstrual discharge on
28 days of the cycle.
●  In females these menstrual cycles continues upto age of 50 years when
menopause occurs and after which a mother cannot become pregnant.
● During this fertile period from menarche to menopause, female undergo
menstrual cycle and period when pregnant and a few months after child birth
(lactation amenorrhea) mother does not undergo menstrual cycle.
● During the course of a menstrual cycle the changes a female undergoes in
its reproductive system are regulated by sex hormone called oestrogen and
progesterone.
● The secretion of progesterone also called pregnancy hormone starts after
14th day of menstrual cycle when ovulation takes place in which an ovum is



released to be pushed into fallopian tube (oviduct) where act of fertilization
takes place.
● If successful fertilization takes place a zygote is formed and the embryo
development start to occur and complete in uterus where embryo gets
implanted and if the fertilization does not takes place, the dead ovum is
expelled from body in menstrual flow marking the end of menstrual cycle
and start the new one.
●  The developing embryo in uterus for its growth takes oxygen and
nourishment from a muscular connection called placenta. It also secrete the
hormone relaxin and HCG whose presence in urine is taken as pregnancy test
by a doctor.
● After the completion of pregnancy period also called gestation period of
270 days i.e. 9 months.
● The hormone oxytocin also called birth hormone from posterior pituitary
gland marks the beginning of parturition i.e. child birth.
● The first milk produced and secreted by mothers for breast feeding of her
child is called colostrum.
●  In a child number of changes takes place soon after birth in first three
months such as ossification of bones i.e. at birth total number of bones in an
infant are about 270 but in 3-months they are reduced to 206, the
development of RBC which takes place in liver of foetus now shifts to bone
marrow while the liver become the site for death of RBC therefore in most
cases an infant suffers from anemia after child birth. As you have learnt in
human health and diseases.
● An infant is ought to be vaccinated for number of diseases like T.B., Polio,
Diptheria, Tetanus and chicken pox etc.
GENETICS
●  The term ‘Genetics’ was coined by Watson to describe the study of
inheritance and variation and the factors controlling them.
●  Today the subject has three main subdivisions — Mendelian genetics,
population genetics and biochemical genetics.
● Heredity may be defined as the transmission of characteristics from one
generation to successive generations of living things.
● The first quantitative study of inheritance was carried out by Gregor John
Mendel on Garden Peas (Pisum sativum).
● Gene is a unit of heredity.



● The various forms of a gene are called alleles.
● Individual organisms in which the members of a pair of alleles are different
are said to be heterozygous.
● Individuals in which the members of a pair of alleles are same are said to
be homozygous.
● The Genotype is the genetic constitution of an organism.
● The observable characteristics of an organism constitutes its Phenotype.
● The ability of a gene to have many effects is called Pleiotropy.
● Pedigree analysis is a system to analyse the distribution and movement of
traits in the family tree.
● The Chromosome Theory of Inheritance by Sutton and Boveri states that
Mendelian genes are located on chromosomes, and it is the chromosomes
that segregate and assort independently.
●  The sexually reproducing animals have, in each of their cells, a set of
chromosomes called autosomes and a pair of sex chromosomes (X and Y).
● In human females there are two X chromosomes and in males one X and
one Y Chromosome.
● Har Gobind Khorana, along with his associates, manufactured short DNA
molecules having a known sequence of bases (Gene).
● DNA molecules synthesize messenger RNA molecules also of known base
sequence. These RNA molecules then direct protein synthesis and form the
sequence of the proteins, the codes were directly established. This is a
milestone in the history of genetics. For this, Khorana shared with M.W.
Nirenberg and R.H. Holley (1968) Nobel prize in medicine.
● Central Dogma, DNA Transcription mRNA Translation Protein
Genetic Disorders
● Albinism : caused by recessive gene, which block the conversion of amino
acid tyrosine to melanin. Effect is absence of pigment in skin, hair and iris of
eyes.
● Down syndrome (Mongolism) : caused by trisomy of chromosome 21.
Effect is physically and mentally retarded patient with round face and widely
separated eyes.
●  Glactosemia : caused by recessive autosomal gene, results in defect in
enzyme system utilizing sugar glactose lead to high–level of galactose in
blood; resulted in development of cataract and brain damage.



●  Hemophilia : caused by sex–linked recessive gene; produce defective
protein, essential for clotting of blood.
●  Huntington’s disease : caused by dominant autosomal gene; lead to
progressive deterioration of nervous system. Peculiar feature developed
between 30 to 40 years.
● Klinefelter syndrome : because of additional X-chromosome; resulted in
improper development of testes.
● Muscular Dystrophy : caused by sex linked recessive gene, resulted in
childhood muscle weakness suffering and atrophy.
●  Phenylketonuria (PKU) : caused by recessive autosomal gene in
homozygous condition, results into accumulation of acid phenylanine and
brain damage. It can be prevented by giving phenylalanine diet.
●  Sickle Cell Anaemia : caused by recessive gene that lead to abnormal
haemoglobin molecule. RBC are sickle shaped with reduced haemoglobin.
●  Tay-Sach disease : caused by autosomal recessive gene-resulted in
cerebral degeneration, epilepsy, paralysis and blindness.
● Thalassemia : (Cooley’s anaemia) mostly in children caused by recessive
gene-resulted abnormality in haemoglobin structures.
● Turner Syndrome : caused by lack of X chromosome (OX); resulted in
phenotypical female but have rudimentary sex organ and mammary gland.
FOOD AND NUTRITION
Balanced Diets
● A diet is balanced if it contains all the nutrients in the correct amount.
● A balanced diet is related to the state of one’s age, health and occupation.
● Carbohydrates, proteins, fats, vitamins and minerals are nutrients.
● Carbohydrates and fats : provide energy.
● Proteins : growth and repair or replacement of cellular mechanism.
● Vitamin and minerals : aid vital reaction in cells and tissues.
●  Roughage : adds bulk in food for proper digestion otherwise leads to
constipation.
●  For Pregnant woman and children protein requirement is high for body
building.
● For Hard–working adult, carbohydrates and fats requirement is high.
Food Tests
● Starch : With iodine solution, brown colour it gives blue black colour.



●  Reducing sugar : Sugars such as glucose gives Benedict’s solution or
Fehling's solution test.
●  Benedict’s solution blue in colour gives yellow to brick red colour
depending on percentage of the glucose present in given solution.
● For oligosaccharide like galactose or maltose. The sugar is first acidified
and heated to break into simple sugar before testing it for presence of simple
sugar.
● Proteins : The proteins present are tested by Biurette test. In the test the
given amount is mixed with equal volume of ammonium or sodium
hydroxide and then heated with solution of copper sulphate.
● The appearance of purple colour shows the presence of protein.
● Fats : These are tested by rubbing them on a piece of paper to which it
makes oily and translucent/transparent. It is also tested by adding in solution
of ethanol with which oils gives cloudy white precipitate.
Important Facts
● Carbohydrates are more suitable for the production of energy in the body
than protein and fats because carbohydrate molecules contain relatively more
oxygen than the others.
● Carbohydrates are supplied to the tissues mainly as blood sugar.
● Carbohydrates are also stored in the tissues as glycogen.
●  Athelets, labourers doing heavy work and mountaineers should live on
high carbohydrates.
● Yield of 1 gm carbohydrate is 17 KJ or 4.1 K cal.
● Carbohydrates account for 60 – 80% energy requirement.
● Fats gives slightly more than twice of energy than carbohydrates because it
contains less oxygen.
● 1 gm fat or oil give 37 kJ or 9.45 k Cal.
● Butter, ghee, cheese, milk, egg, yolk, nut, meat are rich sources of fat.
● Fat is insoluble in water and soluble in organic solvent.
● Fats are stored as lipid in our body.
● Few fats that cannot be synthesized by our body are called essential fat.
The most important of these is Linoleic acid (all vegetable oil contain it,
except coconut oil).
● Linoleic, linolenic and arachidonic acids are essential fatty acids.
● Unsaturated fat : Low melting point, more reactive.
● Saturated fat : Occur mostly in animal fat, high melting point, solidify at
room temperature.



● The principal nutritional role of proteins is to build tissue structures.
● Proteins are made up of 20 amino acids. Some of the amino acids cannot
be synthesized in the animal body and must be supplied with food in
adequate amounts.
●  They are called Essential Amino Acid. Other Amino Acids may be
synthesized in the body, are called Non-Essential Amino Acid.
● Eight–amino–acids are considered essential for human nutrition.
 



Mineral Deficiency Diseases
 

Minerals Sources Functions Deficiency-
signs

Calcium Milk, Essential for the formation of Rickets
Cheese, bones, teeth, coagulation of (malformation of
hard water, milk, contraction of muscle, bones), in Children
green neuromuscular excitability, and Ost- eomalasia
vegetables, permeability of the capillary in adults, tetany
fish, meat endothelium and activation of etc.
etc certain enzymes.

Potassium All food It plays an important role in Retardation of bone
stuffs maintaining intracellular growth, lowering of

osmotic pressure, intracellular heart rate, paralysis
reaction, CO2 carriage, cardiac of muscle,
and muscular contraction. hypertrophy of

Kidney, sterility.
Magnesium Green It is essential for the formation Vascular

vegetables, of bones and teeth and disturbances, hyp-
bread, muscular contraction. It prexcitability,
meat, etc. activates the enzyme, convulsions, tetany

phosphatase. etc.
Iron Green It is one of the main Anaemia

leaves, constituen-ts of haemoglobin,
lentils, cytochrome and myoglobin. It
peas fruits, is related to oxygen carriage in
meat, fish, blood in the form of
liver, egg haemoglobin, and acts as
etc. oxygen store for muscle in the

form of myoglobin. It is also
related to the tissue oxidation
in the form of cytochrome.

Copper Green It acts as an important Anaemia,
vegetables component of many enzymes Wilson's



milk, brain, e.g., cytochrome oxidase, disease
liver, etc. tyrosinase, urinase.

Iodine Common It is an essential constituent of Goitre
salts, sea the hormone thyroxine (an
weeds, active principle hormone of
milk, fish, thyriod gland).
marine
food etc.

Sodium Common Essential for normal functions Reduction of fat
salt, milk, of cells, contraction of deposit, atrophy of
water, muscles, excitation of nerves. muscles and testis,
different It helps to maintain blood lung infection,
food stuffs reaction, formation of HCL of retarded bone
etc. gastric juice, osmotic pressure formation and

and absorption. growth.
Phosphorus Cereals, It is an essential constituent of Rickets, Os-

legumes, cells, bones and teeth. It takes temalacia,
fish, meat, an essential role in muscular dysfunction of
eggs, liver, contraction, phosphorylation renal tubules etc.
kidney etc. of sugars, fats, blood

coagulation, enzymatic
functions of vitamin B-
Complex, regulation of pH of
cells, blood and urine etc.

 



 
Principal Vitamins

 
Vitamin Best Food Source Function Deficiency disease

Retinol : Carrots, Yellow Synthesis of the sual Xerophthalmia :
(Vitamin and green purple of the retinal drying of cornea and
A) vegetables. Other rods. Maintains ulceration. Night
(Fatsoluble) sources include general health and blindness: inability

butter, milk, fish- vigour of epithelial to see in the dark.
liver oil cells. Hence essential Keratinization of

for good skin and eptthelium : Dry skin
hair. and hair.

Thiamine Whole grains, Carbohydrates Beri-beri : Partial
(Vitamin yeast, liver, egg, metabolism. Ensures paralysis of skeletal
B1) (Water pork, nuts normal functioning of muscles and
Soluble) the central nervous digestive

system. disturbances
Riboflavin Cereals, legumes, Essential carboh- Arbiflavonosis :
(Vitamin milk egg, liver, ydate and protein Characterised by
B2) kidney, yeast metabolism especi- corneal ulceration
(Water ially in the cells of the and cracking of skin
Soluble) eye, skin, intestines (especially around

and blood. the lips).
Niacin Lean, meat, liver, Inhibits production of Pellagra :
(Water milk, eggs, nuts, cholesterol and helps Characterised by
Soluble) whole grains in the breakdown of dermatities (skin

fats, proteins and inflammation),
carbohydrates. Diarrhoea and

dementia (loss of
intellectual
function).

Pyridoxine Salmon, yeast, Essential for amino- Epileptioform:
(Vitamin yogurt, corn, acid metabolism. Seizures observed in
B6) spinach, cheese, children. Symptoms



(Water cereals & Assists in production include dermatitis of
Soluble) legumes. Also of antibodies. eyes, nose and

synthesised by mouth; retarded
intestial bacteria. growth.

Folic Acid Yeast, liver, green Helps normal Macrocytic anaemia
(Water leafy vegetables. production of blood : Production of
Soluble) Synthesized by cells. Identified in abnormally large red

intenstinal bacteria chromosomes an blood cells.
also. important

reproductive factor.
Cyanocob- Liver, Kidney, Necessary for red 1. Pernicious
alamine meat, eggs, milk blood cells formation anaemia
(Vitamin and cheese. (Note: and normal 2. Neuro-psychiatric
B12) Absent in functioning of abnormalities :
(Water vegetables, only nervous system. Memory loss, mood
Soluble) Vitamin and personality

containing cobalt). changes.
Ascorbic Citrus fruits, Influences Scurvy : Swollen
acid tomatoes, permeability of gums, teeth loss,
(Vitamin C) cabbage. capillary walls. bleeding gums.
(Water Develops immunity
Soluble) against diseases

Forms collagen.
Calciferol Fish liver oil, egg Controls calcium and Rickets in children,
(Vitamin yolk, milk, butter. phosphorus levels in bow shaped hands
D) (Fat Also synthesized metabolism which and legs. Oesteoma-
Soluble) in the human body contribute to lasia

by the skin under formation of teeth and (demineralization of
the influence of bones. bones)
sunlight.

Tocopherol Wheat germ, fresh As anti-oxidant which Deficiency not
(Vitamin E) nuts, seed oils, protects lipids of cells reported in humans.
(Fat green leafy membe- rances Causes sterility in
Soluble) vegetables against oxygen rats.

damage



Phyllo- Liver, spinach, Assists in the Haemorrhage :
quinones cauliflower, green production of Subcutaneous and
(Vitamin vegetables, prothrombin and intramuscular
K) (Fat tomatoes. other factors that bleedings due to
Soluble) ensure normal delayed clotting

clotting of blood. time.
 



Human Diseases

 
Disease Pathogen Habitat Mode of Main symptoms

responsible transmission of disease
and

incubation
period

Malaria Plasmodium Passes tho- Transmitted to Three stages : Cold
rugh a man by bite of stage, headache,
developmental an infected shivering and
phase in liver, female rising temperature.
resides inside anopheles Fever stage-fever
RBCs and mosquito. rises to its
carried by maximum, severe
blood to all headache, pain in
organs back and joints,

vomiting; Sweating
stage-profuse swe-
ting, fall in
temperature, pain
relieved

Amoebic Entamoeba Large Transmitted Acute dysentery
dysentery histolytica intestine from man to with blood and
or Amoe- man through mucous in stools,
biasis ingestion of and severe

cysts in abdonimal pain,
drinking water, Secondary
vegetables and complications
food include formation
contaminated of multiple
with faeces. abscesses in liver,

lung, brain, spleen
and ulceration of
skin, vagina and
penis.



Sleeping Trypanosoma Reaches Transmitted by Fever, severe
sickness gambiense lymph nodes bite of testse headache,
(Trypano via fly enlargement of
somiasis) lymphatics, glands at back of

blood and neck, rash on the
infests brain back and chest,

joint pains,
swelling of eyelids,
ankles and hands,
trembling, loss of
appetite, no desire
to work except sit
or sleep, mental
disturbances, coma
and death.

Kala-azar Leishmania Reticuloen Man becomes Enlargement of
or black donovani dothelial infected by bite spleen, liver, fever,
sickness cells of sandfly jaundice, skin

becomes dark
through
pigmentation.

 



Diseases Caused by Worms
 

Disease Pathogen Mode of Main symptoms of
responsible Transmission disease

and its habit
Taeniasis Taenia solium; Part of the life cycle Abdominal discomfort,

small intestine in pig, man get chronic indigestion,
(jejunum) of infected on eating anemia, diarrhea, aler-
man pork, infected stage nating with constipation,

being mature cyst false hunger pains.
(cysticercus) in pork.

Ancylosion- Ancyclostoma Transmission from Dermatitis; reddish,
iasis or duodenale; person to person, itchy papule along the
‘Hookworm small intestine filariform larvae path traversed by larvae;
disease' (jejunum) of passed out in faeces, severe anaemia;

man man picks up duodenal ulcer,
infection walking constipation. Patient
barefoot on faecally pale, face puffy with
contaminated soil. swelling of lower

eyelids, oedema of feet
and ankle.

Ascariasis Ascaris Transmission from Larvae in lung cause
lumbrio- person to person, ripe pneumonia. May give
coides; small eggs passed out in rise to typhoid like fever
intestine faeces, infection causes protein and
(jejunum) of affected by Vitamin A deficiencies
man swallowing ripe resulting in protein

Ascaris eggs with calorie malnutrition and
raw vegetables night blindness

respectively. Can cause
appendicitis, jaundice by
blocking lumina of
appendix and billary
passages.



Enterobiasis Enterobius Transmission from Eczematous condition
or verm- icularis; one person to another round the anus,
‘Pinworm' caecum and by ingestion of eggs bedwetting at night,
disease vermiform in contaminated food inflammation of

appendix or drink, vermiform appendix.
Autoinfection itching
in anus; scratching
anus and ripe eggs on
fingers transferred
during food ingestion
of such food.

Filariasis Wuchereria Part of the life cycle Elephantiasis i.e.
banc- rofti or in mosquito in which enormous enlargement
W.malaye; larvae develop and of certain body parts
lymphatic become infective to such as that of leg,
vessels and man, with mosquito scrotum, penis, labia,
lymph nodes bite larvae deposited clitoris, breast, forearm.

on skin which enter
through puncture
wound and reach
lymphatic channels.

Diseases Caused by Viruses

Disease Pathogen Mode of Main Symptoms of the
responsible transmission and disease

incubation period
Small pox Variola Virus Direct contact Onset sudden or gradual
(Now cosid- (droplets); indirect High fever, headache,
ered by infected article; backache skin rash on
completely 12 days third day, passes through
eradicated) stages of macules (bright

red spots), papules,
vesicles (with clear fluid),
postules (with pus like
fluid) and scabs (dried
crusts). Scabs fall off and



leave behind pitted pock
marks.

Chicken Varicella Direct contact Fever, cold, skin eruption
pox zooster virus (droplets); indirect starts as red spots,

by infected objects; vesicles and crusts. Scab :
12-16 days formation in 36 hours

which fall off within 5 to
20 days.

Common Rhino virus Contact : 2-5 days Headache, cough, nasal
Cold discharge, mild fever.
Rabies Rabies virus Bite of a mad Headache, nausea,
(Hydrophobia) (rhabdo (rabid) dog and vomiting, fever,

virus) other animals like insomnia, hoarse voice,
kitten, horse, etc. 2- sight of water sends
16 weeks or longer throat muscles into

painful spasms (fear of
water), convulsions,
paralysis, death.

Dengue fever Dengue virus Mosquito (Aedes Fever, headache, pain in
or brea- kbone (arbo virus) aegypti) bite; 4-8 joints, back muscles and
fever days eye balls, skin rash for a

few days, prolonged
convalescence. Disease
can be classical or
hamorrhagic with decline
in number of blood
platelets

Acquired Human T Via blood and Loss of 10% or more of
Immuno cell sperm among body weight, fever of
Deficiency Leukemia homosexuals, unknown origin,
Syndrome Virus (HTL heterosexuals, pneumonia, brain
(AIDS) VIII) ; also intravenous drug- tumours, haemorrahage,

called LAV users, hemophiliacs unremitting diarrhoea,
(retrovirus) promiscuous swelling of lymph glands,
or HIV individuals and mouth ulcers.



prostitutes.
Infections mother to
child.

Measles Rubella virus Direct contact, virus First stage marked by
transmitted through running nose, sneezing,
air by droplets fever, headache,
during talking, backache and chills.
coughing and Second stage starts 2-3
sneezing; 10-14 days later with
days inflammation of mucus

membrane of upper
respiratory tract, constant
flow of mucus and a red
blotchy skin rash.

Mumps Mumps virus Direct contact; First stage marked by
(Paramyxo- virus in saliva and high fever, headache,
virus) secretion of nose backache, reddened taste

invades salivary buds, either excess of
glands; 12-21 days. saliva or mouth and

throat very dry. In second
stage swelling of salivary
glands about ear and jaws
for 7-10 days.

Poliomyelit- Enterovirus Intestinal discharge After incubation period
ista/ Infantile (Polio virus) hence contaminated of 7-14 days it inflames
Paralysis food or drink. nervous system, with

stiffness of neck, fever,
headache, chilliness, pain
all over body with
paralytic attack in 2-3
days.

Trachoma Chlamydia Direct contact, use Cornea and conjunctiva
trachomatis of handkerchiefs, are affected with

towels, pillows, development of granules,
sharing, etc. pain, watering of eyes



and can lead to the
blindness if left untreated.

Chikungu- Chikungunya Transmited by the Severe joint pains such
nya virus Aedes aegypti patient lies doubled up.

Fever is biphasic with a
period of remission after
1-6 days.

Viral hepatitis 6 varieties of Different modes for Fever, anorexia, nausea,
Hepatitis different strain of vomiting, muscular and
virus A, B, virus. joint pains, enlargement
C, D, E and of liver, Jaundice
G condition

 
DISEASES CAUSED BY BACTERIA

Name of Causative Mode of Symptoms/signs of
Disease agent transmission disease

Cholera Vibrio Cholerae Contaminated After incubation period of
food and water. 2-3 days, stomach ache,

caused, vomiting, rice
water diarrhea. It requires
use of ORS (Oral
Rehydration Solution)
along with drugs.

Typhoid Salmonella typhi Contaminated Fever, body aches
food and water. diarrhoea characterized by

green stools, in severe case,
disease is diagnosed by
Widal test.

Tuberculo Mycobacterium Contaminated air Mild fever, headache, chest
sis tuberculie and inhaled water pains, blood stained

droplets. sputum in severe case with
damage to lungs.

Diphtheria Corny bacterium Contaminated Sore throat, tonsil with



diphtheriae water grey membrane, hoarse
ness, difficulty in the
breathing. Blood tinged
nasal discharge from
nostrils.

Pertussis Bordetella Coughing After incubation period of
(Whooping pertussis discharge 10-16 days, continuous
cough) inhalation. coughing leading to

reddening of face,
vomiting, convulsions and
pneumonia.

Tetanus Clostridium Contamination of Restlessness, headache,
(Lock Jaw tetani cut or wound difficulty in swallow-
ease) with soil dising, and chewing with

containing cow locking of jaw. Treatment
dung. should be with intravenous

intake of ATS (Anti-tetanus
Serum)

Diarrhoeal E. Coli, Shigella Contaminated Stomach ache, diarrhoea
diseases dysenteries, food and water. leading to body

salmonella, dehydration. Hence ORS to
giardia be used as treatment along
intestanlies. with drugs.

 



● Fungal infections– although fungi do not cause many diseases yet the two
caused by them i.e. ring worm and athlete foot are very infectious diseases
both to individual and family member, Hence, they need to be treated from
their onset only.
IMPORTANT DISCOVERIES

Discovery Year Person Country
Circulation of blood 1628 Willaim Harvey Britain
Biochemistry 1648 Jan Baptista Van Helmont Belgium
Bacteria 1683 Leeuwenhoek Netherlands
Physiology 1757 1766 Albrecht Von Haller Switzerland
Vaccination 1796 Edward Jenner Britain
Stethoscope 1819 Rene Laennec France
Morphine 1805 Friderich Sertumer Germany
Chloroform as 1847 James Simpson Britain
anasethetic 1853 Alexander Wood Britain
Hypodermic Syringe
Rabies Vaccine 1860 Louis Pasteur France
Bacteriology 1872 Ferdinand Cohn Germany
Cholera, T.B. germs 1877 Robert Koch Germany
Malaria germs 1880 Laveran France
Aspirin 1889 Dreser Germany
Virology 1892 Ivanovski & Bajernick Russia,
Psycho-analysis 1895 Sigmund Freud Netherlands

Austria
Anti-toxin (science of 1890 Behring & Kitasato Germany,
immunity) 1903 Willam Einthoven Japan
Electro-cardiograph Netherlands
Typhus Vaccine 1909 J. Nicolle France



Sex Hormones 1910 Eugen Steinach Austria
Vitamins 1912 Sir F.G. Hopkins Britain
Synthetic antigens 1917 Landsteiner USA
Insulin for Diabetes 1921 Banting & Best Canada
Peniciliin 1928 Alexander Fleming Britain
Electro- 1929 Hans Berger Germany
encephalogram
Cardiac Pacemaker 1932 A.DS. Hyman USA
D.D.T. (Dichloro- 1939 Paul Muller Germany
Diphenyl-
Trichloroethane) 1940 Karl Landsteiner USA
Rh-factor
LSD (Lysergic acid 1943 Hoffman Switzerland
diethylamide) 1944 Selman Waksmann USA
Streptomycin
Kidney Machine 1944 Kolf Netherlands
Chloromycetin 1947 Burkholder USA
Aureomycin 1948 Duggar USA
Reserpine 1949 Jal Vakil India
Terramycin 1950 Finlay & Others USA
Cryo-Surgery 1953 Henry Swan USA
Open Heart Surgery 1953 Walton Lillehel USA
Poliomyelitis Vaccine 1954 Jonas Salk and Sabin USA
Oral Contraceptive 1955 Gregory Pincus USA
Pills
Artificial Heart 1957 Willam Kolff Netherland
 



ECOLOGY
ECOLOGY
●  Ecology is a scientific study of the reciprocal relationship between
organisms (including microbes, plants, animals, man) with their
environment. It is defined ‘as a scientific study of the relationship of the
living organisms with each other and with their environment’.
● The term Ecology was coined by famous biologist Ernest Haickel.
● The term ecology has been derived from two Greek words namely Oikos
meaning home and
Logos meaning study.
● Literally it is the study of the home of nature.
● Ecosystems are parts of nature where living organisms interacts amongst
themselves and with their physical environment.
● The term ecosystem was coined by Sir Arthur Tansley.
ECOSYSTEM
● Ecosystems consist of life forms existing in a symbiotic relationship with
their environment.
● Two main components exist in an ecosystem : (a) Abiotic (b) Biotic
(a) Abiotic component : The abiotic components of any ecosystem are the
non-living properties of the environment.
●  The abiotic components consist of the non-organic aspects of the
environment that determine what life forms can thrive.
(b) Biotic Component : The biotic components of ecosystem are the life
forms that inhabit it.
●  The biotic components include living organisms comprising plants,
animals and microbes and are classified according to their functional
attributes into Producer and Consumers.
Primary Producers : Autotrophs
● Primary producers are basically green plants and certain bacteria and algae.
● They synthesise carbohydrates from simple inorganic raw materials like
CO2 and water in the presence of sunlight by the process of photosynthesis
for themselves.
●  In terrestrial ecosystem, producers are basically herbaceous and woody
plants.



● In aquatic ecosystem producers are various species of microscopic algae.
Consumers : Heterotrophs or Phagotrophs
● Consumers cannot produce their own food.
● They depend on organic food derived from plants, animals or both.
Ecotone
● Ecotone is a zone of junction between two or more diverse ecosystems
Examples – Mangrove, grassland, estuary and river bank.
Niche
● A niche is the unique Functional role or place of a species in an ecosystem.
It is a description of all the biological, physical and chemical factors that a
species needs to survive. It is a unique for species as it plays an important role
in conservation of organism.
● No two species have exact identical niches.
Biome
●  The terrestrial part of the biosphere is divisible into enormous regions
called biomes, which are characterised by climate, vegetation, animal life
and general soil type.
● The boundaries of biome is determined by the climate
● No two biomes are alike.
● The most important climatic factors are temperature and precipitation.
● Example-Biome Tundra, Taiga, Tropical rain forest, Temperate deciduous
forest, Savanah, Desert etc.
FOOD-CHAINS
● The sequence of eaten and being eaten, produces transfer of food energy
and it is known as food chain.
● A food chain starts with producer and ends with top carnivores.
● The shorter the food chain, the greater is the available energy.
●  Small herbivores consume the vegetable matter and convert them into
animal matter. These herbivores are eaten by large carnivores.
FOOD WEB
● A food web illustrates, all possible transfers of energy and nutrients among
the organisms in an ecosystem.
● The food web provides more than one alternative for food to most of the
organisms in an ecosystems.
POLLUTANTS AND TROPHIC LEVEL



Pollutants especially nondegradablo ones move through the various trophic
levels in an ecosystem.
Movement of these pollutants involves two main processes :
(i) Bioaccumulation
(ii) Biomagnification.
Bioaccum ulation It refers to how pollutants enter a food chain.
● In bioaccumulation there is an increase in concentration of a pollutant from
the environment to the first organism in a food chain.
Biomagnification
● Biomagnification refers to the tendency of pollutants to concentrate as they
move from one trophic level to the next.
●  Thus in biomagnification there is an increase in concentration of a
pollutant from one link in a food chain to another
Biomagnification
In order for biomagnification to occur, the pollutant must be: longlived,
mobile, soluble in fate, biologically active.
● If a pollutant is short-lived, it will be broken down before it can become
dangerous. If it is not mobile, it will stay in one place and is unlikely to be
taken up by organisms. If the pollutant is soluble in water, it will be excreted
by the organism.
Pollutants that dissolve in fats, however, may be retained tor a long lime.
BIOTIC INTERACTION
● Organisms living in this earth are interlinked to each other in one way or
other. The interaction between the organisms is fundamental for its survival
and functioning of ecosystem as a whole.
Biotic Interaction
(+) Benefited for both species (–) harmed
(0) Neither Benefited nor harmed.
1. Mutualism (+) (+)
2. Commensalism (+) (0)
3. Competition (–) (–)
4. Predation (+) (–)
5. Parasitism (+) (–)
6. Amensalism (–) (0)
7. Neutralism (0) (0)
Nutrient Cycling :



The nutrient cycle is a concept that decribes how nutrients move from the
physical environment to the living organisms, and subsequently recycled
back to the physical environment.
● This movement of nutrients from the environment into plants and animals
and again back to the environment is essential for life and it is the vital
function of the ecology of any region.
Water Cycle
●  The water cycle is the continuous circulation of water in the
earthatmosphere system.
● This water cycle is driven by solar energy.
● This water is stored in many reservoirs like — atmosphere, oceans, lakes,
rivers, soils, glaciers, snowfield and ground water.
● Water move from one reservoir to another by the processes of evaporation,
transpiration, condensation, precipitation, deposition etc.
The Carbon Cycle
● Carbon is found in the atmosphere in the form of CO2.
●  In the presence of sunlight, plants take up CO2 from the atmosphere
through their leaves.
● The plants combine CO2 with water which is absorbed by their roots from
the soil.
●  In the presence of sunlight plants are able to form carbohydrates that
contain carbon. This process is called photosynthesis.
● Plant releases O2 into the atmosphere on which animals depend for their
respiration.
● Plants therefore help in regulating and monitoring the percentage of O2 and
CO2 in the earth's atmosphere.
● Both plants and animal release CO2 during respiration.
● When the plants and animal die, they return their Carbon to the soil. In this
way Carbon cycle completes.
Nitrogen Cycle
● Our atmosphere contains 78% free nitrogen (N2).
● All animals including aquatic animals need nitrogen to produce proteins
necessary for life.
● Nitrogen is an essential constituent of protein and is a basic building block
of all living tissue.
● Animals can use N2 in free form.
● They must consume N2 by eating N2 compounds.



● There are four process in the N2
cycle —
1. Nitrogen Fixation 2. Digestion 3. Decomposition 4. Waste production
1. Nitrogen Fixation
● The N2 cycle shows how the free N2 in the air is turned into N2 compounds
and put into the soil by nitrogen fixing bacteria. This process is called
Nitrogen Fixation.
● Nitrogen fixing bacteria's are Azotobacter, Clostridium Rhizobium as well
as blue green algae (e.g. Analsaena, spirulina)
● Plants that soak up the nitrogen compounds in the soil are called legumes,
oats, peas, beans, corn etc
Atmospheric N2 Fixation
●  Thunder storms and lightning are the common photochemical and
electrochemical reactors in nature which convert N2 to oxides of nitrogen.
● They get dissolved in water forming nitrous acid and nitric acid which is
turn combine with other salts to produce nitrates.
SUCCESSION
Succession is a universal process of directional change in vegetation, on an
ecological time scale.
● Succession occurs when a series of communities replace one another due
to large scale destruction either natural or manmade. This process continues
one community replacing another community, until a stable, mature
community develops.
Primary Succession
● In primary succession on a terrestrial site the new site is first colonized by
a few hardy pioneer species that are often microbes, lichens and mosses.
The pioneers over a few generations alter the habitat conditions by their
growth and development.
Secondary Succession
● Secondary succession occurs when plants recognize an area in which the
climax community has been disturbed.
● Secondary succession is the sequential development of biotic communities
after the complete or partial destruction of the existing community.
BIODIVERSITY
●  Biodiversity is defined as the variability among living organism for all
sources, including terrestrial, marrine and other aquatic ecosystems and the



ecological complexes of which they are part, this includes diversity within
species, between species and of ecosystem.
●  India is a recognised as one of the mega diverse countries, rich in
biodiversity and associated traditional knowledge.
● India accounts for nearly 7% of the recorded species.
● A healthy biodiversity provides a number of natural services, resources and
social benefits for a everyone.
TYPES OF BIODIVERSITY
1. Genetic Biodiversity
● Genetic diversity refers to genetic variation within species.
2. Species Diversity
● Species diversity refers to the numbers and kinds of living organisms.
● Species differ from one another, markedly in their genetic make up, don't
interbreed in nature.
3. Ecological Diversity
● Ecological diversity denotes the variety of habitats, biological communities
and ecolgical process.
Causes for the loss of biodiversity : There are number of the causes that
have combined together to adversely affect the existence of the present
biodiversity. Some of these causes include:
Fragmentation : The fragmentation of the natural areas has led to the habitat
loss. Among all, the animals which require large territories like birds and
mammals are the most affected along with migratory animals.
Over-exploitation : The excessive exploitation of a species for human need
has led to the extinct of several species such as of Dodo bird.
Invasion of alien species : The invasion of an alien species whether
voluntarily or involuntarily always threatens the existence of the native
species such as
● Introduction of Water Hyacinth (Echhornia crassipes) now called Terror of
Bengal to check water pollution is clogging the water ways leading to the
death of aquatic plants and animals.
● Introduction of Nile perch, predator fish in lake Victoria in South Africa
has led to the extinction of the native Cichlid fish.
Monoculture: it refers to the mode of agriculture or forestry where only a
specific of economical value is reared and managed for commercial gains.



This however led to the extinction of the other species in spite of their
biological importance in maintain the ecological balance.
BIODIVERSITY HOT SPOTS
● A biodiversity hotspot is a biogeographic region that is both a significant
reservoir of biodiversity and is threatened with destruction.
● Most of these hotsopots are located in the tropics.
Criteria for declaring region as
biodiversity hotspot
1. Region must contain at leost 0.5% or 1,500 species of vascular plants as
endemic.
2. It has to have lost atleast 70% of its primary vegetation.
Indian Hotspots
Major — 1. The Himalayan Hot spot.
2. Indo-Burma Hotspot
3. Western Ghats Hotspot Minor — Sundaland Hotspot (in this Hotspot
Nicobar Island included)
HOT SPOT OF THE WORLD
●  A biodiversity hotspot is a biogeographic region with a significant
reservoir of biodiversity that is under threat from humans.
●  The 25 biodiversity hotspot as indicated is Norman Myers ‘Biodiversity
hotspot for conservation priorities’.
● 9 hotspot have since been added thus there are 34 hotspot in the world.
BIOSPHERE RESERVE
● Biosphere reserves are areas of terrestrial and coastal ecosystem promoting
solutions to reconcile the conservation of biodiversity with its sustainable
use.
● They are internationally recognized, nominated by national governments
and remain under soverign jurisdiction of the state where they are located.
● Biosphere Reserve protect larger areas of natural habitat and often include
one or more National Parks.
●  Protection is granted not only to the Flora and Fauna of the protected
region, but also to the human communities who inhabits in these reign.
● The biosphere reserve programme was launched by the UNESCO in 1971
under the aegis of its ‘man and biosphere programme’.



●  Department of Environment is nodal agency for biosphere reserve
programs.
● The BSR is declared by a notification by the central government of India
and the state government.
● The central government assumes the responsibility of meeting the costs of
setup while the state government would setup derived machinery.
● Nilgiri the first biosphere reserve in India came into being in 1986.
● There are 18 BSRs in India till today.
Biosphere Reserves of India
1. Manas — 1984 — Assam
2. Dibru Saikhowa — 1997 — Assam
3. Kanchanzongha — 2000 — Sikkim
4. Nokrek — 1988 — Meghalaya
5. Dehang-Dibang — 1998 — Arunachal Pradesh
6. Sunderbans — 1989 — West Bengal 7. Simlipal — 1994 — Odisha
8. Nilgiri — 1986 — Tamil Nadu
9. Seshachalam Hills — 2010 — Andhra Pradesh
10. Agasthyamalai — 2001 — Kerala
11. Panchmarhi — 1999 — Madhya Pradesh
12. Panna — 2001 — Madhya Pradesh
13. Achankamar Amarkantak — 2005 — Madhya Pradesh
14. Kachchh — 2008 — Gujarat
15. Gulf of Mannar — 1909 — Tamil Nadu
16. Great Nicobar — 1989 — Andman Nicobar Islands
17. Cold desert — 2009 — Himachal Pradesh
18. Nanda Devi — 1988 — Uttarakhand
Man and Biosphere Reserve (MAB)
● MAB was launched in 1971.
●  UNESCO’s man and the biosphere programme (MAB) is an inter
governmental scientific programme that aims to establish a scientific basis
for the improvement of relationship between people and their environment.
● Participating countries establish MAB programme is defined by its main
governing body, the International Coordinating Council.
● The MAB secretariat is based at UNESCO’s Division of Ecological and
Earth Science, at UNESCO’s head quarter is in Paris.
●  Out of 18 biosphere reserve 10 are a part of the World Network of
Biosphere Reserve based on the UNESCO Man and the Biosphere



Programme list.
List of India's Biosphere Reserve in UNESCO's MAB List
1. Nilgiri — Tamil Nadu — 2000
2. Gulf of Mannar — Tamil Nadu — 2001
3. Sunderbans — West Bengal — 2001
4. Nanda Devi — Uttarakhand — 2004
5. Nokrek — Meghalaya — 2009
6. Panchmarhi — Madhya Pradesh — 2009
7. Similipal — Odisha — 2009
8. Achanakmar Amarkantak — Chhattisgarh — 2012
9. Great Nicobar — Andaman Nicobar —
10. Agasthyamalai — Kerala-T.N. — 2016
Note : Agasthyamalai biosphere recently added in UNESCO’s List
WILDLIFE PROTECTION
PROJECT TIGER
● Project Tiger is a tiger conservation programme launched in 1973 by the
government of India during PM Indira Gandhi's tenure.
● The main objective of this programme is to ensure a viable population of
tiger for economic, scientific, cultural, aesthetic and ecological values.
● Census of tiger began in 2006.
National Green Tribunal (NGT)
The NGT has been established on 18.10.2010 under the National Green
Tribunal Act, 2010, for effective and expeditious disposal of cases relating to
environmental protection and conservation of forests and other natural
resources including enforcement of any legal right relating to environment
and giving relief and compensation for damages to persons and property and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Organisation :
● The sanctioned strongth of the tribunal is currently 10 expert members and
10 judicial members although the act allows for up to 20 of each.
Forests in India [State of Forests Report 2015]
● Forests and tree cover of the country as per state of Forests Report 2015 is
7, 01, 673 km2.
● Total forest Cover as percentage of geographical area is 21.34%.
● State with largest total forest cover is Madhya Pradesh.
● State having highest forest cover as percentage of its area is Mizoram.



● North-East States covers around 25% of total forest cover of the country.
Top five states with maximum forest cover.
Rank State Cover Forest (in km2)
1. Madhya Pradesh 77,762
2. Arunachal Pradesh 67,248
3. Chattisgarh 55,586
4. Maharashtra 50,628
5. Odisha 50,354
Top five states/UTs with maximum
forest cover as part of their area.
Rank State % of states area
1. Mizoram 88.93%
2. Lakshdweep 84.50%
3. A & N Islands 81.84%
4. Arunachal Pradesh 80.30%
5. Nagaland 78.21%

MANGROVE FOREST
● Mangroves are trees and bushes growing below the high water level of
spring tides which exhibits remarkable capacity of salt water tolerance.
●  Mangroves are characteristic littoral plant formation of tropical and
subtropical sheltered coostlines.
● The best locations are where abundant silt is brought down by rivers. It
produce phenatophores to over come respiration problem in the anaerobic
soil conditions.
CORAL REEFS
● Coral is actually a living animal.
● Coral has a symbiotic relationship.
● The builder of coral reefs are tiny animals called Polyps.
● When polyps die, they leave their limestone skeltons behind.
● The limestone is colonised by new polyps. Therefore, a coral reef is build
up of layers of these skeletons covered ultimately by living polyps.
● Coral reefs are a habitat of various sea animals.
● Coral reefs are called a rain forest of ocean.
● They are 0.2% of total area of oceans.
●  They are generally found between line of cancer and line of capricorn
(23½ North — 23½ South)
● Year 2008 was declared as an International coral reef year.



● Environment and Forest Ministry set up a National Coral Reef Research
Center in Port Blair.
● Four Major Coral Reefs in India
1. Gulf of Kachchh
2. Gulf of Mannar
3. Lakshadweep Island
4. Andman and Nicobar Islands
● Among the four major reefs areas of India, Andman and Nicobar Islands
are found to be-very rich in species diversity.
Threat to Coral Reefs
● 75% of the world’s coral reefs are in danger due to local and global causes.
● Local causes — Intensive fishing
● Global causes—
● Increasing in temperature due to global warming

● Pollution

● Sediment loading

● Cyclone etc.
Importance of Coral reefs
● Coral reefs are natural protective barriers against erosion and storm surge.
● They are the reproductive centre of many species.
● They provide substrate for mangroves.
Coral Bleaching
● Bleaching or the paling of coral colour occurs when 1.the densities of zoo
xanthellae decline or 2.the concentration of photosynthetic pigments within
the zooxanthellae fall.
GREEN HOUSE
● A Green House is a building made of glass chambers in which plants are
grown in cold countries or in cold elevated areas.
● There is a continuous increase in temperature in green house even when
the outside temperature remained low. It protects plants from frost.
THE GREEN HOUSE EFFECT
Greenhouse effect is term for the role the atmosphere plays in helping to
warm the Earth’s surface.



● The atmosphere is largely transparent to incoming solar radiation, because
it is largely comprised ofroys of shorter wave lengths. Much of this
oncoming radiation is absorbed by the Earth’s surface. The hot surface of the
earth than reemits heat energy at long-wave infrared rays.
While some of the intrared radiation passes through the atmosphere, a large
part of it is absorbed and redistributed back by goses such as carbon dioxide,
Methane, nitrous oxide, halocarbons, water vapour and ozone in the
atmosphere. This heating effect is called the green house effect and it causes
global warming. The green house effect has two types :
GREEN HOUSE GASES
Carbon Dioxide
● Carbon Dioxide (CO2)
● Methane (CH4)
● Nitrous oxide (N2O)
● Sulphur hexafluoride (SF6)
● Chlorofluorocarbons (CFC)
● Primary green house gas.
● Hydrofluorocarbons (HFC5)
● Perflurocarbons (PFC5)
● Ozone (O3)
● Water Vapour (H2O)
Rankwise Top 10 Green House Emitting Countries : Rankwise
1. China 2. USA 3. European Union 4. India 5. Russia 6. Indonesia 7. Brazil
8. Japan 9. Canada 10. Mexico
ACIDIFICATION
● Acid rain is the rainfall that has been acidified. It is formed when oxides of
sulfur and nitrogen react with the moisture in the atmosphere.
● Rain considered as acid rain when PH goes below 5.6.
Compounds Causing Acid rain Compounds Sources
Sulphur Soil and oceans, volcanic eruptions, Biological process in the soil,
Burning of coal, petroleum products, Industries.
Nitrogen Lightening, volcanic eruption, Biological activity, Industries
Formic Acid Biomass burning.
Other Acids Chlorine, Phosphoric acid, Hydrochloric acid, carbon monoxide,
Carbon dioxide Ocean acidification



CO2 effect on Ocean Acidification
Less Plankton Production Less Productive Fisheries Coral reaf can’t grow
Impact of Acid Rain :
●  The exchange between hydrogen ions and the nutrient cations like
Potassium and magnesium in the soil cause leaching of the nutrients, making
the soil infertile.
● This is accompanied by a decrease in the respiration of soil organisms.
●  An increase in ammonia in the soil due to a decrease in other nutrients
decrease the rate of decompositions.
● Surface erosion in building stones, black crust formation etc. Fading colour
change in monuments.
Ocean Acidification :
● Oceans are an import reservoir for CO2.
● They absorb one third of CO2
produced by anthropogenic activities.
● Ocean acidification is the change of ocean chemistry.
●  When the uptake of atmospheric CO2 by the ocean increases, the
concentration of H2 ions in the ocean increases, but when the concentration
of CO2 ions decreases, the pH of the oceans decreases and the ocean become
less alkaline this process is called ocean acidification.
Ozone layer and its protection
● Ozone is a natural gas. It is found in atomosphere.
●  Ozone consists three atoms of oxygen bound together in non linear
fashion.
● The chemical symbol is O3.
● About 90% of the ozone in the atmosphere is contained in the stratosphere
(range 10-50km) above Earth’s surface, the highest concentrations bteween
about 20 and 40 km. It is very important because it absorbs ultraviolet rays
which is harmful for human being, animals & plants.
● The ultraviolet rays cause direct damage to the genetic material, on DNA
of animals and plants cells.
● Dobson is the unit of Ozone Layer measurement.
Sources of Ozone Depletions
●  Chlorofluorocarbons (CFC)–The most widely used Ozone depleting
substance, accounting for over 80% of total stratozpheric ozone depletion.
● Used as coolonts in refrigerators, freezers and air conditioners in buildings
and cars.



●  Also found in industrial solvents, dry-cleaning agents and hospital
sterilants.
● Methyl Chloroform–used mainly in industries for vapour decreasing, cold
cleaning, aerosols, adhesives and chemical processing.
Efforts taken for the Conservation of Ozone layer Vienna Convention
● The Vienna conference is 1985 the first internation conference on ozone
layer depletion.
● Convention in this conference entered into force in 1988.
● The convention does not include legally binding reduction goals for the use
of CFCs and other Ozone Depleting Substances.
● These legally binding reduction goals for Ozone Depleting Substances are
laid out in the Montreal protocol.
Montreal Protocol It is an international treaty to protect the ozone layer by
phasing out the Ozone Depleting Substances across the world.
●  The toealy was put forward in 1987, this treaty entered into force on
January 1989.
National Air Quality Index (AQI)
● For monitoring the air quality in major cities across the country on the real
time basis government launched Air Quality Index is April, 2015. It is colour
based index and shows the quality of air by different colour.
●  There are six AQI categories, namely Good, Satisfactory, Moderately
polluted, poor, very poor and severe.
STATEWISE LIST OF NATIONAL PARKS IN INDIA
S. No. National Park Andhra Pradesh Estb. Area (in

km2)
1. Papikonda National Park 2008 1012.86
2. Rajiv Gandhi National Park 2005 2.40
3. Sri Venkateswara National Park Telangana 1989 353.62
4. Kasu Brahmananda Reddy N.P. 1994 1.43
5. Mahavir Harina Vansthali N.P. 1994 14.59
6. Mrugavani National Park Arunachal Pradesh 1994 3.60
7. Namdapha National Park 1983 1807.82
8. Mouling National Park Assam 1986 483



9. Dibru-Saikhowa National Park 1999 340
10. Kiziranga National Park 1974 858.98
11. Manas National Park 1990 500
12. Nameri National Park 1998 200
13. Orang National Park Bihar 1999 78.81
14. Valmiki National Park Chhattisgarh 1989 335.65
15. Indravati National Park 1982 1258.37
16. Kanger Valley National Park 1982 200
17. Guru Ghasi Das (Sanjay) National Park Goa 1981 11,440.71
18. Bhagwan Mahavir (Mollem) National Park 1992 107

Gujarat
19. Blackbuck National Park, Velavadar 1976 34.53
20. Gir National Park 1975 258.71
21. Marine National Park, Gulf of Kutch 1982 162.89
22. Vansda National Park Haryana 1979 23.99
23. Kalesar National Park 2003 46.83
24. Sultanpur National Park Himachal Pradesh 1989 1.43
25. Pin Valley National Park 1989 675
26. Great Himalayan National Park 1984 754.4
27. Inderkilla National Park 2010 104
28. Khirganga National Park 2010 710
29. Simbalbara National Park Jammu and 2010 27.88

Kashmir
30. Dachigam National Park 1981 141
31. Hemis National Park 1981 3350
32. Kishtwar National Park 1981 425
33. Salim Ali National Park Jharkhand 1992 9.00
34. Belta National Park Karnataka 1986 226.33



35. Bandipur National Park 1974 874.2
36. Banerghatta National Park 1974 260.51
37. Kudremukh National Park 1987 600.32
38. Nagarhole (Rajiv Gandhi) National Park 1988 643.39
39. Anshi National Park Kerala 1987 417.37
40. Eravikulam National Park 1978 97
41. Mathikettan Shola National Park 2003 12.82
42. Periyar National Park 1982 350
43. Silent Valley National Park 1984 89.52
44. Anamudi Shola National Park 2003 7.50
45. Pambadum Shola National Park Madhya 2003 1.32

Pradesh
46. Bandhavgarh National Park 1968 448.85
47. Kanha National Park 1955 940
48. Madhav National Park 1959 375.22
49. Mandla Plant Fossils National Park 1983 0.27
50. Panna National Park 1981 542.67
51. Indira Priyadarshini Pench National Park 1975 292.85
52. Sanjay National Park 1981 466.88
53. Satpura National Park 1981 585.17
54. Van Vihar National Park Maharashtra 1979 4.45
55. Chandoli National Park 2004 317.67
56. Gugamal National Park 1975 361.28
57. Navegaonc National Park 1975 133.88
58. Sanjay Gandhi National Park 1983 86.96
59. Tadoba National Park 1955 116.55
60. Pench National Park Manipur 1975 257.26
61. Keibul Lamjao National Park Meghalaya 1977 40
62. Balphakram National Park 1985 220
63. Nokrek National Park Mizoram 1986 47.48
64. Murlen National Park 1991 100
65. Phawngpui Blue Mountain National Park 1992 50

Nagaland
66. Intanbi National Park 1993 202.02
67. Odisha 1988 145

Bhitarkanika National Park



68. Simplipal National Park 1980 845.70
69. Rajasthan 1982 273.80

Sariska National Park
70. Ranthambore National Park 1980 282
71. Mukundra Hills (Darrah) National Park 2006 200.54
72. Desert National Park 1992 3162
73. Keoladeo National Park 1981 28.73
74. Sikkim 1977 1784

Khangchendzonga National Park
75. Tamil Nadu 1990 103.24

Mudumalai National Park
76. Mukurthi National Park 1990 78.40
77. Indira Gandhi (Annamali) National Park 1989 117.10
78. Guindy National Park 1976 2.82
79. Gulf of Mannar Marine National Park 1980 6.32
80. Tripura 2007 31.63

Bison (Rajbari) National Park
81. Clouded Leopard National Park 2007 5.08
82. Uttar Pradesh 1977 490

Dudhwa National Park
83. Uttarakhand 1989 2390.02

Gangotri National Park
84. Govind Pashu Vihar 1990 472.08
85. Jim Corbett National Park 1936 520.82
86. Nanda Devi National Park 1982 624.6
87. Rajaji National Park 1983 820.24
88. Valley of Flowers National Park 1982 87.5
89. West Bengal 1992 79.45

Gorumara National Park
90. Buxa National Park 1992 117.10
91. Neora Valley National Park 1986 159.89
92. Singalila National Park 1986 78.60
93. Jaldapara National Park 2014 216.51
94. Sundarbans National Park 1984 1330.10
95. Andaman and Nicobar Islands 1983 281.50

Mahatma Gandhi Marine National Park



96. Middle Button Island National Park 1987 0.44
97. Mount Harriet National Park 1987 46.62
98. North Button Island National Park 1987 0.44
99. Rani Jhansi Marine National Park 1996 256.14
100. Soddle Peak National Park 1987 32.54
101. South Button Island National Park 1987 0.03
102. Campbell Bay National Park 1992 426.23
103. Golathea National Park 1992 110

###COMPUTER HISTORY###
● The genesis of mechanical/digital computing can be traced back to Blaise
Pascal (1623-1662) and GW Liebnitz (1646-1716). However, Charles
Babbage (1792-1871) was the first to imagine a machine that could process
data. He designed first difference engine and analytical engine and an all
purpose calculating machine. He is rightly known as the father of computer
science.
Computer “Computer is an electronic device for performing arithmetic
and logical operations”, or “Computer is a device or flexible machine to
process data and convert it into information. Computer is programmable
meaning that it all depends upon what program computer is using for
performing a particular function.
● Programme : It is a set of instructions fed into the computer on what to
do.
●  Hardware : It is a actual machine that does whatever the Software
(computer programs) tells it to do.
Four basic operations of a computer
1. Input : This is for the purpose of inserting or feeding data into the
computer by means of an input device like keyboard.
2. Processing : Some kind of processing is done in the computer to take out
or transform the data in some way.
3. Output : The computer produces output on a device, such as printer,
scanner or a monitor, that shows the result of processing operations.
4. Storage : The computer stores the result of processing operations for
future use in some storage device like hard disk, compact disk drive (CD



Rom) or a floppy disk.
Characteristices of Computer
● Accuracy ● Versatility ● Memory ● Diligence ● Speed ● Storage ● Reliability
● Automated
Components of a digital computer
A digital computer can be broadly classified as a collection of four
components.
They are :1. Input unit 2. Output unit 3. Central Processing Unit 4. Memory
(auxiliary)
Input Unit : The Input Unit provides an interface between the users and the
machine, for inputing data and instruction etc.
Some common input devices are listed below :
1. Keyboard 2. Mouse 3. Voice data entry 4. Joystick 5. Light pen 6. Scanner
7. Secondary storage devices 8. Punch Card Readers 9. Optical Mouse 10.
Speech Recognisition system
Output Unit : The Output Unit also provides an interface between the user
and the machine. The output unit receives the data from the CPU in the form
of binary bits.
This is then converted into a desired form (graphical, audio, visual etc.)
understandable by the user.
Some common output devices are :
1. Visual Display Unit (Monitor)
2. Printers
3. Speakers
4. Secondary Storage Devices
5. Tape Reader
6. Plotter The input and output unit are collectively referred to as
‘peripherals’
Central Processing Unit (CPU) :
It is the brain of the computer system. The input and output devices may vary
for different application, but there is only one CPU for a particular computer.
The central processing unit can be further divided into :
1. The Arithmetic Logic Unit (ALU)
2. The Control Unit
3. Main Memory
Functions of CPU :
1. Performs arithmetic calculations such as addition, subtraction etc.



2. Performs logical decisions.
3. Performs data transmission.
4. It can manipulate tasks such as word processing.
Arithmetic Logic Unit (ALU) :
The arithmetic logic unit performs all arithmetic and logic calculations on the
data it receives. Arithmetic Calculations like addition, subtraction,
multiplication division, exponentiation etc. Logical Calculations are basically
decision making statements e.g. A > B, It decides whether A is greater than
B or not. If A is greater, the statement is true and logical '1' would be
generated otherwise illogical '0' would be generated.
Control Unit : The Control unit controls the entire operations of the
computer and the CPU. It controls all the other devices connected to the
CPU, i.e. Input devices, Output devices, Auxiliary Memory etc.
Hence, the control unit acts as the nerve centre of the computer.
Main Memory Unit : The main memory also known as the primary
memory. It is a part of the central processing unit and is a combination of
both RAM (random access memory) and ROM (read only memory).
RAM : The random access memory is read write memory i.e. information
can be read as well as written into this type of memory. It is volatile in
nature, i.e., the information it contains is lost as soon as the system is shut
down unless ‘saved’ for further usage by users.
It is basically used to store programs and data during the computer’s
operation.
ROM : It contains information that can only be read. It is nonvolatile or
permanent in nature. It is basically used to store permanent programs such as
program for the functioning of the monitor.
Cache Memory : The cache memory lies in the path between the processor
and the main memory.
DATA MEASUREMENT CHART
Data Measurement Size
Bit Single Binary Digit (1 or 0) Nibble 4 bits Byte 8 bits Kilobyte (KB)
1,024 Bytes Megabyte (MB) 1,024 Kilobytes Gigabyte (GB) 1,024
Megabytes Terabyte (TB) 1,024 Gigabytes Petabyte (PB) 1,024 Terabytes
Exabyte (EB) 1,024 Petabytes Zettabyte (ZB) 1,024 Exabytes Yottabyte
(YB) 1,024 Zettabytes
CONVERSION TABLE



Traditional Units Decimal for Comparison
Name Symbol Bionary Equal to Name IEC Decimal

Kilobytes KB 210 1024 B Kilobit kbit 103

Megabyte MB 220 1024 KB Megabit Mbit 106

Gigabyte GB 230 1024 MB Gigabit Gbit 109

Terabyte TB 240 1024 GB Terabit Tbit 1012

Petabyte PB 250 1024 TB Petabit pbit 1015

Exabyte EB 260 1024 PB Exabit Ebit 1018
Zettabyte ZB 270 1024 EB Zettabit Zbit 1021
Yottabyte YB 280 1024 ZB Yottabit Ybit 1024

COMPUTER GENERATION
 

Generation Chief Memory Operating Language Examples
Years Components Elements System

Ist 1940-55 Vacuum Magnetic No Machine ENIAC
Tubes/ drums for language EDSAC
Electronic memory (Lowest- EDVAC
valves for level UNIVAC
circuitry programming

language)
2nd 1956-63 Transistors Magnetic No Assembly IBM 700/

(invented in) cores Language, 1401
1947 Magnetic High level IBM 7030

Tapes language
e.g.,
FORTRAN,
COBOL

3rd 1964-71 Integrated RAM, LINUX ALGOL C, CDC
Circuits DISKS C++ 6600/ 760



(semi JAVA IBM 360
conductors SQL IBM 370
were used) CRAY-1

4th 1972 LSI (Large All Windows SQL All PC's
Present Scale Primary, DOS, ORACLE &

Integration)/ Secondary LINUX Desktops,
VLSI (Very Storage CRAYX-
Large Scale devices MP
Integration)

5th Develop Artificial Some application such as voice recognition that
ment Intelligence, are being used today are based on artificial
phase Robotics & intelligence.

Nano
Science

 



Next Generation Computer
Nano Computer : It is a computer whose fundamental parts are in
nanometers. It can be built by using mechanical, electronic, biochemical or
quantum technology.
Quantum Computer : It is a computational device that makes direct use of
quantum mechanical phenomena, such as superposition and entanglement, to
perform operations on data.
Software : It is used to describe the instructions that are given to computer.
These instructions can be either a single programme or a group of
programmes.
Types of Software
1. System software 2. Application software 3. Utility software
Computer Programming : It is the process of designing, writing, testing,
debugging / troubleshooting, and maintaining the source code of computer
programs. This source code is written in a programming language.
Programming languages : Consists of words, symbols and usage rules
pertaining to the grammar that permits people to communicate with the
computer programming languages must cater to the following tasks :
— input/output — text manipulations/calculations — logic/comparison —
storage/retrieval Some of the commonly used languages for various
applications are :
1. Scientific and Engineering : Ex., BASIC, FORTRAN
2. Business and Commercial purpose : Ex., COBOL , BASIC, 3. Text
Processing : Lisp, SOSL
4. General Purpose : PASCAL, ADA, 5. Artifical Intelligence (AI) :
PROLOG, LISP
OPERATING SYSTEM
The operating system is the core software component of the computer.
It performs many functions and is, in very basic terms, an interface between
your computer and the outside world.
Types of Operating System
There are many types of operating systems. The most common is the
Microsoft suite of operating systems. They include from most recent to the
oldest :
● Windows 10 ● Windows 7 ● Windows XP Professional Edition ● Windows
XP Home Edition ●  Windows 2000 ●  Windows ME ●  Windows 98 ●



Windows NT ● Windows 95 ● Unix ● Linux ● Apple Macintosh
Kernel : The kernel is the central component of most computer operating
systems. It is a bridge between applications and the actual data processing
done at the hardware level. The kernel's responsibilities include managing
the system's resources. It typically makes these facilities available to
application processes through inter-process communication mechanisms and
system calls.
Multitasking : In computing, multitasking is a method where multiple tasks,
also known as processes, share common processing resources such as a CPU.
Multiprocessing : Multiprocessing is the use of two or more central
processing units (CPUs) within a single computer system. The term also
refers to the ability of a system to support more than one processor and/or the
ability to allocate tasks between them.
Applications : Applications are programs that are installed on computers to
give users the ability to do specific tasks. For example, Microsoft Word is a
program that gives the user the ability to write documents.
NETWORKING
Computer Network Definition : A network is any collection of independent
computers that communicate with one another over a shared network
medium. A computer network is a collection of two or more connected
computers.
Types of Networks :
LANs (Local Area Networks) : A network is any collection of independent
computers that communicate with one another over a shared network
medium. LANs are networks usually confined to a geographic area, such as a
single building or a college campus.
WANs (Wide Area Networks) : Wide area networking combines multiple
LANs that are geographically separate. This is accomplished by connecting
the different LANs using services such as dedicated leased phone lines, dial-
up phone lines (both synchronous and asynchronous), satellite links, and data
packet carrier services.
MANs (Metropolitan area Networks) : A metropolitan area network
(MAN) is a computer network that usually spans a city or a large campus.
A MAN usually interconnects a number of local area networks (LANs) using
a high-capacity backbone technology such as fibres-optical links, and
provides up-link services to wide area networks (or WAN) and the Internet.



The OSI Model : Open System Interconnection (OSI) reference model has
become an International standard and serves as a guide for networking.
This model is the best known and most widely used guide to describe
networking environments.
There are seven layer in OSI model the physical layer, data link layer,
network layer, transport layer, session layer, presentation layer, and the
application layer.
Network Topologies : It is the geometric arrangement of nodes and cable
links in a LAN, There are two types of topology: physical and logical.
The physical topology of a network refers to the configuration of cables,
computers, and other peripherals. Logical topology is the method used to
pass the information between workstations.
The most common protocols are :
● Ethernet
● Local Talk
● Token Ring
● FDDI
Main Types of Physical Topologies
● Linear Bus
● Star
● Star-Wired Ring
● Tree
Hubs/Repeaters : Hubs/repeaters are used to connect together two or more
Ethernet segments of any media type. Hubs provide the signal amplification
required to allow a segment to be extended a greater distance.
Bridges : The function of a bridge is to connect separate networks together.
Bridges connect different networks types (such as Ethernet and Fast
Ethernet) or networks of the same type. Bridges map the Ethernet addresses
of the nodes residing on each network segment and allow only necessary
traffic to pass through the bridge.
Routers : Routers filter out network traffic by specific protocol rather than
by packet address. Routers also divide networks logically instead of
physically. An IP router can divide a network into various subnets so that
only traffic destined for particular IP addresses can pass between segments.
A Network Firewall : A firewall is a system or group of systems that
enforces an access control policy between two networks. Some firewalls
place a greater emphasis on blocking traffic, while others emphasize



permitting traffic. Probably the most important thing to recognize about a
firewall is that it implements an access control policy.
Proxy server : In computer networks, a proxy server is a server that acts as
an intermediary for requests from clients seeking resources from other
servers. A client connects to the proxy server, requesting some service, such
as a file, connection, web page, or other resource, available from a different
server. The proxy server evaluates the request according to its filtering rules.
IP Addressing : An IP (Internet Protocol) address is a unique identifier for a
node or host connection on an IP network.
An IP address is a 32 bit binary number usually represented as 4
decimal values, each representing
8 bits, in the range 0 to 255 (known as octets) separated by decimal points.
This is known as “dotted decimal” notation.
Example : 140.179.220.200
Address Classes : There are 5 different address classes. You can determine
which class any IP address is in by examining the first 4 bits of the IP
address.
Class A addresses begin with 0xxx, or 1 to 126 decimal.
Class B addresses begin with 10xx, or 128 to 191 decimal.
Class C addresses begin with 110x, or 192 to 223 decimal.
Class D addresses begin with 1110, or 224 to 239 decimal.
Class E addresses begin with 1111, or 240 to 254 decimal.
Addresses beginning with 01111111, or 127 decimal, are reserved for
loopback and for internal testing on a local machine.
INTERNET
The Internet, the World Wide Web, or the Web are all names used to describe
the vast network of information in cyberspace, available to anyone who has
access to a computer, a browser (software), and a connection to an Internet
service provider through a modem (or other connection such as DSL, ISDN,
LAN etc.).
The Internet is a massive network of networks, i.e. a networking
infrastructure.
Web : The Web is a way of accessing information over the medium of the
Internet. It is an information-sharing model that is built on top of the Internet.
The Web uses the HTTP protocol, to transmit data. This stands for Hyper
Text Transfer Protocol.



E-mail : Electronic mail, commonly called email, e-mail is a method of
exchanging digital messages from an author to one or more recipients.
FTP : stands for File Transfer Protocol. This is both a program and the
method used to transfer files between computers. Anonymous FTP is an
option that allows users to transfer files from thousands of host computers on
the Internet to their personal computer account.
Web Browsers : A web browser is software, installed on your computer, that
allows you to navigate the Internet. Example : Netscape Navigator and
Microsoft Internet Explorer.
Web Sites : contains all the information offered by a particular organization,
individual, or company, and will sometimes include links to other sites as
well.
INTERNET ACCESS METHODS
Internet access refers to the means by which users connect to the Internet.
Common methods of consumer Internet access include: ● Dial-up ● Wimax ●
ADSL ● Wifi ● Mobile ● Broadband ● Modem
Viruses
Virus is a program that runs on a system against the owner’s or user’s wishes
and knowledge. Viruses have one or more methods they use to spread.
Most commonly they will attach a file to an e-mail message and attempt to
trick victims into running the attachment.
Spyware : This usually comes with some free programs and it will monitor
your internet activity and send information to some corporation.
This type of program is not normally seriously harmful but most people do
not want to have their activities monitored.
Worms : It is a program very similar to a virus, it has the ability to self
replicate and can lead to negative effects on your system
Trojans : Trojans or Trojanhorse, do not reproduce by infecting other files,
nor do they self-replicate like worms. It is a program which disguises as a
useful program or application.
Spam : Spam is unsolited junk e-mail sent to large numbers of e-mail
addresses. It is used to promote some product or service and many spam
emails are pornographic in nature.
COMPUTER ACRONYMS
Address Bar : An address bar is a text field near the top of a Web browser
window that displays the URL of the current webpage. The URL, or web



address, reflects the address of the current page and automatically changes
whenever you visit a new webpage. Therefore, you can always check the
location of the webpage you are currently viewing with the browser's address
bar.
Bit : Short for binary digit; either a 1 or a 0; the smallest unit into which
digital information may be broken.
Boot up : The process of turning on the computer, which includes a number
of functions that are performed automatically every time the power switch is
turned on.
Byte : There is Eight Bits in a Byte
Compressed File : Computer files that have been reduced in size by a
compression program. Such programs are available for all computer systems.
Crash : An unexpected shutdown either of a program or the whole system.
Cyberspace : A term coined by author William Gibson. It describes the
imaginary space in which computer users travel when “surfing” the Internet.
Domain Names : A name given to a host computer on the Internet. Email
names are good examples of domain names (i.e.,anyname@mopo.ca).
Download : The process of transferring information from one computer to
another, usually from a server to a client. You download a file from another
computer to yours.
DPI : Dot per inch is a measure of spatial printing or video dot density, in
particular the number of individual dots that can be placed in a line within
the span of 1 inch (2.54 cm).
Floppy Disk : is a flat, portable, disk made of plastic that can store files
written magnetically on it’s surface. Information stored on Floppy disk can
be read, copied, or deleted. The disk is protected by a shell or cover of some
kind. “Floppy” is now a misnomer, it was originally referred to an obsolete
type of disk 5.25" disks were actually flexible or floppy, while new ones,
3.5" disks, are not.
GB : Acronym “Gigabyte” 1,000 Megabytes. A measure storage space.
Hard Drives are measured in GB capacity.
GIF : Acronym “Graphic Interchange Format” One of two popular systems
used to compress the size of image files so, they require less bandwidth to
transfer on the Web.
GUI : This is a system where things are shown graphically. This means that
instead of entering commands on a text only screen with a keyboard, the user
manipulates icons and windows, often with a mouse.



Hyperlink : A code which contains an “address,” which when clicked, will
take you to that address.
Icons : pictures that are shortcuts to programs or files. By clicking on an
icon, you start the program or open the file. Usually these are
ISDN : Acronym “Integrated Services Digital Network” Large bandwidth
telephone line. Allows you to transfer information quickly.
JAVA : Developed by Sun Microsystems mainly to enhance the “online
experience” of the World Wide Web.
Port : port refers to the hardware through which computer data is
transmitted; the plugs on the back of your computer are ports. On the
Internet, port often refers to a particular application. For instance, you might
telnet to a particular port on a particular host. The port is actually an
application.
SQL : Acronym “Structured Query Language” an official ANSI language
for retrieving information from a database. Most database software providers
add extensions. The “official” pronunciation is “sequel,”
Surfing : The random, aimless exploration of web pages achieved through
following links that look interesting within a document.
TCP/IP : Acronym “Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol” A
set of protocols (communications rules) that control how data is transferred
between computers on the Internet.
UNIX : A computer operating system, popular with high-end computer
users, academics and the research community. Most hosts connected to the
Internet run UNIX.
USB : Acronym “Universal Serial Bus” (the plug is very flat and has no pins
or prongs). This is a style of port connection that is used by many peripheral
devices such as Palm Pilots, phones, scanners, printers etc. This type of
connection is much faster than more traditional kind of connections such as
serial and parallel ports (often used by older printers these ports have plugs
with little screws attached).
URL : Acronym “Universal Resource Locator” The specific path to a World
Wide Web file, including filename and extension.
Web Page : A single screen (document) on a Web site.